Bhimpalasi is a Hindustani classical raga.
Arohana and Avarohana.
The raag has komal Ni and Ga.
It is an Audava-Sampoorna raga, implying that it has 5 notes in Arohana and 7 in Avarohana.
Organization and relationships.
The Rishabh and the Dhaivat are skipped in Aarohi passages, but are given due importance when descending.
Use of the Dhaivat and Rishabh is symmetric and both are approached via the succeeding notes.
List of Film Songs based on Ragas.
He has been a recipient of many awards.
Vijay Sardeshmukh, born in June 1952 was initiated into music by his Father, Vitthalrao Sardeshmukh.
Vitthalrao was a Sanskrit pandit, a vocalist and an accomplished harmonium player.
He accompanied many vocalists of renown including Pt.
Bhimsen Joshi, Pt.
Kumar Gandharva and others.
Kumar Gandharva, who was a good friend of Vitthalrao, later became Vijays Guru.
Vijay has learned from Kumar Gandharva 1971 onward.
Gifted with melodious voice, Vijay made his debut in  Swar sadhana Conference  organised in Pune in 1974.
Since then he has performed in many concerts of repute, including the Sawai Gandharva and Tansen Samaroha.
He is Graded Artist of All India Radio and Doordarshan since 1977.
His cassettes and C D s are released by HMV and Alurkar Music House Pune.
Kumar Gandharvas desciples, Vijay 's presentation is widely recognized as very close to that of his Guru.
A meditative quality that prevailed in Kumar Gandharvas music can be richly experienced in Vijays music.
Kumar Gandharvas education always included singing as well as discussion.
It was this fusion of thought process and music that Vijay inherited from Kumar Gandharva which prompted concerts like Kalyan Darshan.
Two Tanpuras, tuned to the highest degree of perfection, play a vital role in Vijay 's music.
To quote Kumar Gandharva 's thought behind this,  This is our canvass, how can an artist paint in thin air ?.
Drawing on the tanpuras, Vijayjee is known to make the air vibrant with various ragas with minutest of the shruti differences.
Thus entwined, Vijayjee points, in the minds of his audience.
Known for his soft spoken and modest nature Vijay is a man of few words but boundless music within him.
List of Awards.
A list of awards received by him.
Vijay is retired from the service of Bank of India and is devoted his life in classical music.
He has two sons Swaand and Swaroop.
Alladiya Khan was an Indian classical singer, known as Gaan Samraat.
Khan founded the Jaipur-Atrauli gharana based on the Agra gharana.
He is also recognized for his revival and creations of many ragas.
Early life and background.
Alladiya Khan served in the court of various kings of Rajasthan, including that of Amlata.
He sang so well and so much for the kings that he nearly lost his voice due to hours of riyaaz.
Later he settled down in Kolhapur as the court musician of the local king, Shahu Maharaj.
In 1922 he moved to Mumbai after the king died.
With his distinguished reputation, Ustad Alladiya Khan became a gem among the many masters in Mumbai.
He taught many disciples and sang in many mehfils in Mumbai to which his reputation as an academic grew.
Many of these Raags were originally created and sung by the Havelis in northern Rajasthan, where Khansahab grew up.
Hearing the Haveli sangeet Khansahab took many of the Raag-based Bhajans and created Raags and Bandishes with them.
One of the Raags he resurrected was Raag Basanti Kanada.
Khansahabs brother helped grow the Jaipur-Atrauli Gharana after Khansahabs demise.
Mallikarjun Mansur and Appasaheb Deshpande are among noted deciples of Bhurji Khan.
In Mumbai, Alladiya Khan sahebs prime disciples were Kesarbai Kerkar, Mogubai Kurdikar and Nivruttibuwa Sarnaik.
In 2005, the 150th birth anniversary of the musical legend was celebrated.
Amaan Ali Khan.
Amaan Ali Khan is an Indian classical musician who plays the sarod.
Accompanying his father to various music festivals in India and abroad, he has today carved out a niche for himself.
His performances have evoked creditable applause.
He performed in 1986 at the Festival of India in Moscow at the age of eight.
Thereafter, Amaan made his UK debut in 1990 and his US debut in New York at the Asia Society in 1991.
He is an inspiration for the younger generation of musicians.
He continues to enchant audiences with his virtuosity, sheer brilliance and charismatic stage presence.
In 2001 and 2002 he took part at the Summer Arts Festival in Seattle and the Edinburgh Festival in the UK.
Other Festivals over the years include Womad and Salisbury Festival and the Enescu Festival in Bucharest.
In 2005 Amaan composed for the music for the film American Daylight by academy award winner Rodger Christian.
The spring of 2005 saw collaboration at the Savannah Music Festival in Georgia with the Derek Trucks Band.
Same year, he featured with his father in Real World Record 's much-acclaimed album Moksha in May 2005.
His electronica lounge albums titled Reincarnation and ` Truth ' won him critical acclaim.
He performed recently at New York 's Metropolitan Museum and The Lensic in Santa Fe.
Amaan released his solo album titled ` Amaan ', in 2002.
On reviewing this album, Songlines World music magazine said that his performance was a  worthy heir to his father 's crown.
Awards and accolades came his way early in life.
In October 2002, he received Provogue Society 's Young Acheivers Award for performing Arts.
Roli Books, Lustre Publications published the book as a part of their ` Family Pride ' series.
He also took part in the relay for the 2004 Athens Olympics in New Delhi in June 2004.
Amaan performed at the Central Hall of the Indian Parliament on the commemoration of Indias 60th year of Independence in 2007.
Amaan recently performed at Stanford University 's Dinkelspiel Auditorium at the end of his father 's Stanford University residency.
Amaan recently presented his father Sarod Concerto Samaagam with the London Philharmonia Orchestra with conductor David Murphy.
Ustad Vilayat Khan was one of India s well known sitar maestros.
Vilayat Khan was born in Gauripur, British India to Enayat Khan, a sitar maestro.
His family of musicians trace their pedigree back to the court musicians of the Mughals.
His uncle Zinde Hassan looked after his riyaz.
His performance made headlines as Electrifying Sitar in Bombay next day of his concert organized by Vikramaditya Sangeet Parishad, Mumbai.
Also, he liked to perform without a tanpura drone, filling out the silence with strokes to his chikari strings.
Towards the end of his life, he also performed and recorded sporadically on the surbahar.
He has performed duet concerts with maestros like Bismillah Khan, Ali Akbar Khan, brother Imrat Khan.
In addition to these, he also gave music for a little-known documentary film in Bengali produced by Dr. Barin Roy.
For Jalsaghar he won a Silver Medal for Composing at the 1st Moscow International Film Festival.
The Imdad Khan family is of Rajput lineage.
The family is of Hindu origin and later converted to Islam.
In an informal continuation of his rajput lineage Ustad Enayat Khan kept a Hindu name of Nath Singh.
Ustad Vilayat Khan himself composed many bandishes using the pen name Nath Piya.
Vilayat Khan spent much of his life living in Calcutta.
He was married twice.
He had three children from his first marriage - Sufi singer Zila Khan and Yaman Khan and Sitarist Shujaat.
From his second marriage he had one son Hidayat, also a professional Sitarist.
He was survived also by his younger brother, Imrat Khan, the post-war star of the surbahar field.
The brothers played celebrated duets in their youth, but had a severe falling-out and for years were not on speaking terms.
His nephew Ustad Rais Khan is also a star sitar-player.
Late Tushar Banerjee.
The Maestro also gave sitar lessons to Big Jim Sullivan, the famous English session musician.
He enjoyed horse-riding, pool playing, swimming and ballroom dancing.
Fans and media alike liked to play up Vilayat Khans rivalry with and animosity towards Ravi Shankar.
However, in calmer moments Vilayat would admit there was not much to it.
His animosity for the politics and institutions of Indias cultural life was another matter.
Among other honours he turned down was the Sangeet Natak Akademi Award.
For a while, he also boycotted All-India Radio.
Sitar Maestro Vilayat Khan Refuses Padma Bhushan, The Hindu, February 7, 2000.
53431 is a Greatest Hits compilation by the electro-pop band Swami.
The title refers to the numerical spelling of the bands name.
It also contains two new songs reported to be from the bands upcoming studio album.
Merukhand techniques were developed within the Bhendibazar gharana and popularized by masters like Aman Ali Khan and Abdul Waheed Khan.
His disciple Thomas Ross says of this permutational style that.
Merukhand is now a part of the improvisational strategy within the Indore gharana founded by Amir Khan.
Ustad Badruddin Manji Khan was a Hindustani Classical vocalist of the Jaipur-Atrauli Gharana founded by his father, Utd.
Manji Khan was the second son of Utd.
Because of the health ailments of his other two brothers, elder Utd.
Nasiruddin Badeji Khan and younger Utd.
Shamsuddin Bhurji Khan, Utd.
Manji Khan was treated and chosen by Utd.
Alladiya Khan as the foremost inheritor and disciple of the Jaipur-Atrauli gayaki.
He was called Manji because he was his fathers Manjhala son.
Musical style and training.
Manji Khan was heavily influenced by Utd.
Rahimat Khan, a popular vocalist at the time, of the Gwalior Gharana.
The influence of Utd.
Rahimat Khans style in Utd.
Bhurji Khans singing earned him the wrath of his father, and thus gave up singing for a while.
He resumed it later, under his fathers conditions.
but his career was cut short by his early death.
Mallikarjun Mansur became Utd.
Manji Khans disciple just before Khans death.
Later, Mansur learned under Bhurji Khan.
Gulubhai Jasdanwalla also learned from Utd.
Manji Khan for several years.
It was through the initiative of a friend that Utd.
Manji Khan noticed Pt.
Already trained in the Gwalior style, Pt.
Mansur was able to absorb the rich Jaipur-Atrauli style of Utd.
Mansur is Utd.
Manji Khans sole musical inheritor.
Manji Khan died an untimely death in 1937.
Like his famous father, Utd.
Manji Khan did not leave behind any recordings.
Gregory Rogove is an American indie music drummer and songwriter.
He is notable for partnering with indie artist Devendra Banhart to form the group Megapuss.
He signed a record contract with Knitting Factory Records in 2011.
Rogove grew up in Amish country in Lancaster, Pennsylvania of Jewish parents with some of his distant ancestors being Mennonites.
When eighteen, he traveled to India on a year-long scholarship and studied the tabla.
He described India as a swirl of energy.
He traveled to Singapore, Mali, and Mexico.
At Wesleyan University, he studied musical composition.
In the music scene in New York City, he founded a band called Tarantula A.D. which later became the band Priestbird.
He performed with artists such as Beck and met Paul McCartney.
He plays piano, organ, flute in addition to his mainstay of writing songs.
The band Priestbird was formed by mutual associations of friends.
One reviewer described Rogove in Priestbird as anchoring a welcome foray into sludgy, feedback-heavy noise-rock after a performance in 2009.
A second reviewer found the songs to be trippy and were more epic, heavy, and hypnotic.
During these years he became friends with musician Devendra Banhart, and they collaborated on songs and toured together.
A reviewer later asked : Have you found yourself talking about your genitals a lot ?.
and Rogove said it had been a prescribed aesthetic decision in which everyone is very well represented.
The album Surfing was recorded in a cabin near Los Angeles and released in 2008.
One report was that the words Mega puss translated from Swedish to English means Mega kiss or big kiss.
Reviews have varied from positive to mixed.
A third reviewer described the album as obnoxious.
In 2011, Rogove lives in Los Angeles.
PHS produced and co-wrote the album.
In addition to Ms Scandalous MCing, the album featured the sung vocals of Jaspinder Narula and Alyssia.
Shri is a British Asian multi-instrumentalist and producer.
Shri specializes is acoustic, electric and computing based live performances.
Shri incorporates traditional Indian instruments into his music.
Shri grew up in Mumbai, India in a musically inclined family.
Shris father plays the sitar, and his mother and sister play the Carnatic violin.
He trained as a classical tabla player for about 14 years at Pandit Nikhil Ghoshs school in Mumbai.
Tired of the rigidity of classical music, Shri went on to teach himself bass, guitar and flute.
Later, Badmarsh & Shri produced two albums for Outcaste Records as a duo, Dancing Drums in 1998 and Signs in 2001.
Shri released another solo album, East Rain, in 2005, with Drum the Bass Records.
All of these albums mixed blended Electronica and Drum n Bass with traditional Indian ragas.
In 2007, Shri released Seven Steps with Drum the Bass Records featuring his single, Just for a Minute.
Quest was released by Folktronic, a sub-brand of Day 1.
Shri is also a composer for theatre productions.
Shris latest avatar, Shrilektric, was designed to suit live performances wherein Shri performs either solo as a multi-instrumentalist, or with collaborators.
Shrilektric was premiered at Bonobo in Mumbai on 3 August 2011.
The second Shrilektric performance took place on 13 December 2011 at Blue Frog in Mumbai.
In 2012, Shri performed a 4-day 4-city tour in India.
Starting May 24, he performed in Delhi, Hyderabad, Jaipur and Pune.
This tour was coordinated by Folktronic.
High Profile Involvements.
Shri recently wrote the music for Google Chromes video advertisement in India.
This video won the Gold and Silver awards at the Goa film festival.
It was short-listed for the CLIO 2012 awards in the category of Best Original Music.
It was also short-listed for the Cannes Lions awards.
He also scored Tata Sumo Gold 's latest video advertisement.
The song Changing World was recorded.
The Dewarists won the bronze medal at Cannes Lions 2012.
The pakhavaj or mridang is an Indian barrel-shaped, two-headed drum, a variant and descendant of the mridang.
The pakhavaj has a low, mellow tone, very rich in harmonics.
The word or is of Prakrit origin, whose Sanskrit equivalent is.
This instrument is always known as pakhavaj and not pakshavadya.
This word is derived from the words, and.
As with the tabla, the pakhavaj rhythms are taught by a series of mnemonic syllables known as bol.
In traditional pakhavaj styles a student would learn a number of different strokes which produce a specific sound.
These are remembered and practiced with corresponding syllables.
| dha dha | din ta | | kite dha | din ta | tite kata | gadi gene |.
Advanced students learn reelas that are virtuoso pakhavaj compositions.
Jawaad Ali Khan.
Jawaad Ali Khan is a Hindustani classical vocalist of the Kasur Patiala Gharana.
Jawaad Ali Khan started his musical career in the early 80s.
He is an A-grade vocalist of All India Radio.
He has performed at almost every music conference of India with his elder brother Mazhar Ali Khan.
The sarod is a lutelike stringed instrument of India, used mainly in Indian classical music.
Along with the sitar, it is among the most popular and prominent instruments in Hindustani classical music.
The name Sarod roughly translates to beautiful sound or melody in Persian, one of the many languages spoken in Afghanistan.
A parallel theory credits descendants of Madar Khan, Niyamatullah Khan in particular, with the same innovation around 1820.
This reflects the general state of Indian instrument making today.
The design of the instrument depends on the school of playing.
There are three distinguishable types, discussed below.
Among the contemporary sarod players, this basic design is kept intact by two streams of sarod playing.
Amjad Ali Khan and his disciples play this model, as do the followers of Radhika Mohan Maitra.
The descendants of Niyamatullah Khan also play similar instruments.
Some of the followers of Radhika Mohan Maitra still carry the second resonator on their sarods.
Amjad Ali Khan and his followers have rejected the resonator altogether.
These instruments are typically tuned to B, which is the traditional setting.
Another more technically sophisticated and acoustically superior type is that designed by Allauddin Khan and his brother Ayet Ali Khan.
This instrument has 25 strings in all.
These include four main strings, four jod strings, two chikari strings and fifteen tarab strings.
The main strings are tuned to Ma, Sa, lower Pa and lower Sa, giving the instrument a range of three octaves.
This variant is, however, not conducive to the performance of clean right-hand picking on individual strings.
The instrument is typically tuned to C.
The finest Sarods are made by Hemen Sen of Calcutta.
Sarod strings are either made of steel or phosphor bronze.
Most contemporary sarod players use German or American-made strings, such as Roslau, Pyramid and Precision.
Early sarod players used plain wire plectrums, which yield a soft, ringing tone.
There are two approaches to stopping the strings of the sarod.
Maitra, however, made much more extensive use of the third fingernail for slides and hammers.
Amjad Ali is, however, pictured circa 1960 playing with all three fingers.
Key figures in its early development.
Wajid Ali Shah.
Wajid Ali Shah.
was the fifth King of Oudh, holding the position from 13 February 1847 to 11 February 1856.
He was the tenth and last Nawab of the state of Awadh in present day Uttar Pradesh in India.
He ascended the throne of Awadh in 1847 and ruled for nine years.
He was a poet, playwright, dancer and great patron of the arts.
He is widely credited with the revival of Kathak as a major form of classical Indian dance.
As a Nawab.
Wajid Ali Shah succeeded to the throne of Awadh when its glory days were at its peak and passing.
In different circumstances perhaps, he might have succeeded as a ruler because he had many qualities that make a good administrator.
This proved to be the trigger the British were looking for, and formed the official basis for their annexation.
Recent studies have, however, suggested that Oudh was neither as bankrupt nor as lawless as the British had claimed.
In his book Awadh Under Wajid Ali Shah, Dr. G.D. Bhatnagar gives the following assessment of this ill-starred prince :.
Wajid Ali Shahs character was complex.
Though he was a man of pleasure, he was neither an unscrupulous knave nor a brainless libertine.
He was a lovable and generous gentleman.
He was a voluptuary, still he never touched wine, and though sunk in pleasure, he never missed his five daily prayers.
It was the literary and artistic attainments of Wajid Ali Shah which distinguished him from his contemporaries.
Patron of the arts.
Contribution to music.
He was not only a munificent patron of music, dance, drama, and poetry, but was himself a gifted composer.
Under this pen name, he wrote over forty works - poems, prose and Thumris.
Diwan-i-Akhtar, Husn-i-Akhtar contain his Ghazals.
He is said to have composed many new ragas and named them Jogi, Juhi, Shah-Pasand, etc.
Revival of Kathak.
Kathak dance attained new heights of popularity and glory under his expert guidance and lavish patronage.
Thakur Prasadji was his Kathak guru, and the unforgettable Kalka-Binda brothers performed in his court.
The greatest musicians, dancers and instrumentalists of the time enjoyed his munificent patronage and hospitality.
These girls were known as Paris with names such as Sultan pari, Mahrukh pari and so on.
Rahas, prepared at a fabulous cost of several lakhs of rupees, became very popular, and was performed at the Kaisarbagh-Rahas Manzil,.
It featured Radha, Krishna, several sakhis, and a vidushaka-like character called Ramchera.
Songs, dances, mime, and drama were all delightfully synthesised in these Rahas performances.
He dramatised many other poems such as Darya-i-Tashsq, Afsane-i-Isbaq, and Bhahar-i-Ulfat.
It is said that Amanats Inder Sabha was inspired by these dance-dramas, written, produced and staged by Nawab Wajid Ali Shah.
His exile years.
Because of an Earthen Dome, people called it Matiya Burj.
His legacy : Babul Mora Thumri.
baabul moraa, naihr chuutto hii jaae.
caar khaar mil, morii ddoliyaa sjaaveN.
aaNgnaa to prbt bhyo aur dehrii bhyii bidesh.
Swami Harballabh was an Hindustani classical vocalist and a saint.
He established the first Hindustani classical music festival in the world in 1875 known as Harballabh Sangeet Sammelan.
He was born in an affluent family at a village in Bajwara.
He was a student of Swami Tulja Gir, who encouraged him to practice art and music.
The place where Swami Hariballabh used to sing became a Mecca for the best Musicians and players of Classical Music.
Sandeep Das is an Indian Tabla virtuoso, composer and cultural entrepreneur.
Nominated twice for the Grammy Award, he is considered one of the leading tabla artists.
Early life and education.
Sandeep completed his schooling from St. Xaviers High School, Patna.
He is a Gold Medalist in English Literature from Banaras Hindu University.
He started learning tabla under Shiv Kumar Singh at the age of 8.
He was three times the national drumming champion and the youngest drummer ever to be graded by all-India radio.
A favorite disciple of Pt.
Kishanji Maharaj, he started learning under him at the age of 9.
Sandeep would travel on weekends from his city Patna to Benaras, where his Guru lived.
Later, his family shifted to Benares so that his musical education could continue unhindered.
His debut was at the age of 15 with the famous Sitar Maestro Pt.
Sandeep is an acclaimed soloist and frequently accompanies stars of Indian music such as Ustad Amjad Ali Khan, Pt.
Shiv Kumar Sharma, Pandit Hari Prasad Chaurasia, Pandit Debu Chaudhury, Dr. L Subramaniam and Ustad Shujaat Khan, among many others.
Das debuted outside India in 1991, with steel drum bands in Trinidad.
With his deep understanding of music and communication skills, he has successfully transcended the gap between Indian and Western classical music.
He has won acclaim for himself with his performances in concerts all over the world.
His own compositions exhibit both the Western and Indian genres of music.
Tarang was chosen as the theme music for Blind Sight, a documentary about the first Everest climb by six blind climbers.
He has been nominated for the Grammy Awards twice.
In 2003 his recording The Rain was nominated for a Grammy in the World Music category.
In this album, Sandeep Das collaborated with Shujaat Khan and Kayhan Kalhor.
His track Sulvasutra, composed by Evan Ziporyn, featured in this album.
Silk Road Project.
The ensemble is a spin-off of the Silk Road project.
In March 2010, HUM presented its World Premiere Concert at Kamani Auditorium, New Delhi and Birla Sabhaghar, Kolkatta.
In February 2011, Hum Ensemble performed at the Rhythm Of Life Concert at Siri Fort Auditorium, New Delhi and NCPA, Mumbai.
In November 2012, Hum Ensemble performed at the World Harmony Concert, at Kamani Auditorium, New Delhi.
The concert received critical acclaim in Indian media.
Through these concerts, HUM raises funds for its endeavors to support education in arts of differently-abled children.
HUM also plans to provide health insurance for aging artists.
Sandeep Das is regularly invited to teach at prestigious institutions.
In 2012, he was invited by the School of Education, Harvard University for a course on Arts in Education.
With Eviyan, MIT, Cambridge, March 2013.
Performed at the Concertgebouw theater, Amsterdam.
Performed many times at the world famous Carnegie Hall.
Performed with The Boston Symphony Orchestra, Tanglewood, August 2010.
50th Anniversary of Lincoln Center, New York, June 2009.
Performed with Pt.
Performs with Ustad Amjad Ali Khan, Pt.
Shiv Kumar Sharma, Pt.
Hari Prasad Chaurasia, Pt.
Debu Choudhury, Pt.
Rajendra Prasanna, Smt.
Shubha Mudgal, Dr.L.Subramaniam, Kavita Krishnamurty.
United Nations Day Concert, United Nations General Assembly Hall, October 2008.
Performed with the Chicago Symphony Orchestra and Silk Road Ensemble at Pritzker Pavilion, Millennium Park, 2006.
World Festival, Hollywood Bowl, August 2005, in front of an 85 thousand full house.
Kennedy Center, Washington DC, April 2005.
Mostly Mozart Festival, Lincoln Center, August 2004.
Royal Albert Hall, London, August 2004.
Performed his piece Tarang at the world famous music festival BBC Proms, August 2004.
Singapore Arts Festival, Esplanade - Theatres on the Bay, Singapore, July 2004.
Vancouver Recital Society, Vancouver, November 2002.
Performed with the New York Philharmonic Orchestra, March 2001, Avery Fisher Hall, Lincoln Center.
Performed for many visiting country heads including Queen Elizabeth and Queen of Thailand.
Dover Lane Music Conference, Kolkata.
ITC Music Festival, Kolkata, Mumbai, Delhi.
Saptak Music Festival, Ahmedabad.
Harivallabh Sangeet Samaroh, Jalandhar - the oldest festival of Indian Classical Music in the world.
Hum Ensemble : World Premiere Concert, Kamani Auditorium, New Delhi, 2010.
Hum Ensemble : World Premiere Concert, Birla Sabhaghar, Kolkatta, 2010.
Hum Ensemble : Rhythm of Life Concert, Siri Fort Auditorium, New Delhi, 2011.
Hum Ensemble : Rhythm of Life Concert, NCPA, Mumbai, 2011.
Hum Ensemble : World Harmony Concert, Kamani Auditorium, New Delhi, 2012.
Khajuraho Music and Dance festival.
St. Xaviers Music Festival, Mumbai.
Music Academy Festival, Chennai.
Sankat Mochan Music Festival, India.
Pune Mahotsav, Pune.
Konark Music and Dance Festival, Konark.
Tansen Sangeet Samaroh, Ujjain.
Shankar Lal Music Festival, Delhi.
Ellora Music Festival.
Ganga Mahotsav, Varanasi.
Ram Navami Music Festival, Bangalore.
Tansen Sangeet Samaroh, Lucknow.
Banglore Hubba, Bangalore.
Rajgrih Mahotsav, Rajgrih.
Bihar Mahotsav, Bihar.
Vindhyachal Mahotsav, Uttar Pradesh.
Bharat Bhawan, Bhopal.
Ustad Allauddin Khan Mahotsav, Bhopal.
Maihari Music Festival, Maihar.
Times of India Music Festival, New Delhi, Mumbai, Bangalore, Hyderabad.
A Playlist Without Borders, Silk Road Ensemble, 2013, Label : Sony Masterworks.
Mumbai, Big Grenadilla/Mumbai, with Evan Ziporyn, 2012.
Sulva Sutra, Off The Map, Silk Road Ensemble, 2009, Label : World Village.
When Strangers Meet, Tarang, Movie : Blind Sight, 2007.
Mohini, Beyond the Horizon, Yo-Yo Ma & The Silk Road Ensemble, Movie : Silk Road, 2005.
Srishti, New Impossibilities, Yo-Yo Ma & The Silk Road Ensemble, Label : Sony Classical Music.
When Strangers Meet, Silk Road Journeys, Yo-Yo Ma & The Silk Road Ensemble, Label : Sony Classical Music.
The Rain, with Kayhan Kalhor and Shujaat Khan, 2003, Label : ECM Records.
Lure Of Desert, with Pt.
Vishwa Mohan Bhatt, Label : T Series.
The Best of Cord, Vishwa Mohan Bhatt, Label : India Music Club.
Virasat, with Ustad Shujaat Khan, Recorded Live at Saptak festival, Ahmedabad, 2008, Label : Sense World Music.
My Inspirations, with Ustad Amjad Ali Khan, 2004, Label : Navras Records.
Indian Delta, with Pt.
Vishwa Mohan Bhatt, Recorded Live at Saptak festival, Ahmedabad, 2001, Label : Sense World Music.
Swar Shikhar, with Pt.
Vishwa Mohan Bhatt, The Taj Heritage Series, Recorded Live in Jodhpur, 2001, Label : Virgin Records.
Maestros Mehfil, with Pt.
Vishwa Mohan Bhatt ,1995, Label : T Series.
The Tradition Of Khyal on Sitar-2, with Ustad Shujaat Khan, 2003, 1995, Label : Makkar Records.
Raag Bilakshani Todi, with Ustad Shujaat Khan, 1994, Label : Young Spirit.
Awards And Recognitions.
Grammy Nomination, Best Classical Crossover Album, 2009, for album Off The Map.
Grammy Nomination, Best World Music Album, 2005, for the album The Rain.
Awarded Chattra Vibhushan by Banaras Hindu University.
Awarded Significant Achievement Award by St. Xavier 's High School.
Awarded Patna college Blue by Patna College.
Sandeep Das resides between New Delhi, India and Boston, USA.
They have two daughters, Sakshi and Sonakshi.
Pandit Jasraj is an Indian classical vocalist.
He belongs to the Mewati gharana of Hindustani classical music.
Jasraj was born in Hisar, Mewat region, Haryana in an orthodox Brahmin family to Motiram, a classical singer.
His family performed the Mewati gharana style.
Jasraj was initiated into vocal music by his father.
In addition, he trained under Swami Vallabhdas of the Agra Gharana.
As a means of livelihood, Maniram took Jasraj as an accompanying tabla player.
However, at the time, like sarangi players, tabla players were considered minor artists.
He finally cut his hair after garnering his first AIR Radio performance, where he sang Raga Kaunsi Kanada.
Jasrajs vocal range extends three-and-a-half octaves and uses precise diction, a trademark of the Mewati gharana s style of khayal.
He has also done extensive research in Haveli Sangeet under Baba Shyam Manohar Goswami Maharaj to create numerous innovative bandish.
It ran for 36 years as of 2008.
Jasraj participated at the Sawai Gandharva Music Festival.
After their marriage the couple lived in Kolkata for some time.
They have a son, Shaarangdev Pandit, and a daughter, Durga Jasraj, a television anchor and presenter.
Music composers Jatin-Lalit are Jasrajs nephews, and Sulakshana Pandit is his niece.
Qureshi Alla Rakha Khan popularly known as Alla Rakha was an Indian tabla player.
He was a frequent accompanist of Ravi Shankar.
Personal life and education.
Alla Rakha was born in Paghwal, Jammu, British India.
His mother tongue was Dogri.
He studied voice and Raag Vidya under Ashiq Ali Khan of the Patiala gharana.
His regimen of practice and dedication were legendary : hours upon hours of hard, disciplined practice, that would later pay off.
Alla Rakha had another daughter, Razia, whose death preceded his by less than 24 hours.
He also married to a lady belonging to Faisalabad, Pakistan.
It was a love marriage.
Rohi Bano, a popular TV actress in 1980s, was his daughter from this wedlock.
She is still alive.
He had another brother called Sabir who practised tabla in Lahore.
Soon after, he composed music for a couple of Hindi films from 1943-48.
His eldest son, Zakir Hussain is also an accomplished tabla virtuoso.
Ustad Alla Rakha Khan popularised the art of tabla, playing across the globe, elevating the status and respect of his instrument.
Alla Rakha also collaborated with jazz drummer Buddy Rich, on their 1968 album Rich a la Rakha.
Ustad Alla Rakha Khan was awarded the Padma Shri in 1977 and the Sangeet Natak Akademi Award in 1982.
Lalmani Misra, M.A., Ph.D., D. Mus.
Initiation into music.
Lalmani learnt Dhruvapada Dhamar in the tradition of Pt.
Shankar Bhatt and Munshi Bhrigunath Lal.
He learnt Khayal singing with Ustad Mehndi Hussain Khan, a disciple of Ustad Vazir Khan of Rampur Seni Gharana.
He received training in Dhruvpad, Bhajan and Tabla from Swami Pramodanand ; in sitar from Shri Shukdev Roy.
Under the tutelage of Ustad Amir Ali Khan he perfected several other musical instruments.
Lalmani was appointed on the post of assistant music director in Shehanshahi Recording Company, Calcutta at the age of twelve.
He worked in several films for the next two years.
His interaction with these two, kindled an interest for orchestration in Lalmani.
Making music work.
He returned to Kanpur in 1940 after his father 's death.
He established the reputed institution of the region,  Bharatiya Sangeet Parishad , and a music college -  Gandhi Sangeet Mahavidyalaya.
The renowned dance maestro Pt.
Uday Shankar offered him the position of music director in his troupe.
Lalmani Misra traveled with the troupe composing scores for the innovative dance presentations and ballets on mythological and contemporary themes.
The experience with the troupe made him try his hand on stage as well.
He created Meera opera that was staged in 1956 at Kanpur.
The audience were amazed by sudden disappearance of Meera from stage, apparently merging into the idol of Lord Krishna.
By 1955-56 its teething troubles were over and department was ready for expansion.
Shaping higher education.
Under his able helmsman-ship, the college increased its reputation in imparting the best education in Hindustani classical music.
He was visiting Professor to Music faculty at Penn University, Philadelphia from 1969 to 1978.
Many students came to learn intricacies of music with him.
Pandit Uday Shankar sent his son Ananda Shankar to Dr. Misra to learn the art of orchestration.
He wrote several other books.
The first part of four-part treatise on techniques of strings was published as Tantri Nad.
His biographical sketches and writings have been printed in several books and journals.
Dr. Ragini Trivedi is working on books planned by Dr. Misra which could not be published during his lifetime.
Another set of compositions has been presented in a symbol-based notation system, Ome Swarlipi.
second volume of Rag Vibodh : Misrabani was released in February 2013 by Hindi Madhyam Karyanvaya Nideshalaya, Delhi.
Researcher and inventor.
Carrying out research in the music of Vedic age, he unraveled the mystery of Samic scale.
To re-establish the lost notes of that period he created a Raga Sameshwari.
Unesco released a compact disc of his Vichitra Veena entitled The Music of Pandit Lalmani Misra in 1996.
True inventions are seldom noticeable.
Early on, Dr. Misra found use of Teen Tal in slow and medium compositions ubiquitous.
He realized that it was the possibility of Chhand-s that made this Tal a favorite of most instrumentalists.
He experimented and created equally alluring Chhand-s in other Tal-s.
Legendary percussionists were enamored by his compositions because of their complex, oblique rhythm pattern and called it Koot ki Taan.
Later this style came to be known as Misrabani.
Rajashekhar Mansur is a Hindustani Classical vocalist of the Jaipur-Atrauli gharana.
He is the son and disciple of Hindustani vocalist Pt.
He was awarded the 2012 Sangeet Natak Akademi Award, the highest award for performing artists, conferred by the Sangeet Natak Akademi.
Early life and education.
Mansur was born to singer Mallikarjun Mansur, one of the leading singers of the Jaipur-Atrauli gharana founded by Ustad Alladiya Khan.
At the age of 16, Rajashekar performed Rag Malkauns in his college gatherings and received tuition from his father.
He also taught English at P.G.Centre Gulbarga.
He is now Top Grade Vocalist in the AIR.
He has performed extensively in many prestigious music festivals throughout the country.
The Karnatak Government has recognised his contributions to music by awarding him the Rajyotsava Award.
He was nominated as the chairman of Karnatak Sangeet Nrutya Akademi.
He is also the recipient of Karnatak Kalashri Gaurav Award.
His music has been preserved in the archives of Indira Gandhi Manav Sangrahalaya in Bhopal.
In September 7, 2009, he released his music album, In The Footsteps and Beyond to coinciding with his 60th birthday.
Sabir Khan is an Indian vocalistand harmniam player.
He belongs to Sikar gharana of music who have given several stalwarts to Indian classical music.
Born in Jodhpur, Rajasthan to sarangi player and vocalist Ustad Sultan Khan.
He trained under his father and his uncle Ustad Nasir Khan.
He is the ninth generation to take up Sarangi.
His great grand father Ustad Azim Khan sahab was a court musician at Sikar Rajasthan.
Sabir Khan started was exposed to music when he was six year old through his grand father Ustad Gulab khan.
He shares the stage with his father and apart from solo concerts.
Sabir khan is well known today for his delicate mastery of sarangi.
His technique of playing is rare combination of sur and laya.
Sabir khan performs with his father in concert and also solo.
He has performed alongside artists such as Ustad Zakir Hussain, pt.Kumar Bose, pt.
He played in several feature films like Chameli, Rog, Dor, Anwar, Sanwariya, Chodon na yaar, Jodha Akbar.
His cousin, Dilshad Khan, is also a popular Sarangi player and Uncle Hanif Khan who is a tabla player.
Kaushiki Chakrabarty is a prominent Indian classical vocalist.
Chakrabarty was born 1980 in Kolkata, India.
She is the daughter of Chandana Chakraborty and the renowned Indian classical singer Ajoy Chakraborty.
She completed her schooling at Patha Bhavan school, Kolkata.
Apart from singing, she hosts a weekly talk-show with singers in the entertainment channel Ruposhi Bangla.
She is married to Parthasarathi Desikan and they have a son named Rishith.
MTV Coke Studio - Season 2 - Song Name - Lagi Lagi.
The Raga Bhinnashadaja is one of the most melodious Ragas of Hindustani Classical Music.
It belongs to Bilawal Thata.
It contains five Shuddha Swaras : Shadaja, Gandhar, Madhyama, Dhaivata and Nishad.
Rishabh and Pancham are omitted.
In the form of notation it contains S, G, M, D and N.
Raga Bhinnashadaj is known by many alternate names such as AudawaBilawal, Bhookosh, DinkaMalkosh, Hindoli, Koushikdhwani and Kousidhani.
Audava-Audava/Five notes-Five notes.
Aroha & Avaroha - Ascent and Descent.
SG, MD, NS  ; S , ND, MG, S. Vadi and Samvadi.
DN SG, SGSM-G, SGMD, GMND, MG, MDNS , DNS  G  S , S  G  M  G  S ,.
Gaan Samaya - 10 p.m.-1 a.m. Raga Bhinnashadaja of Carnatic Music has a different melodic structure.
However, Carnatic Ragas Chandrakauns, Daka and Dakka of Dheerasankarabharanam Melkarta are scale-congruent with Bhinnashadaja of Hindustani Classical Music.
Similar Ragas from Hindustani Music - Rageshri, Chakradhar, and Hemant.
Similar Raga from Carnatic Music - Chandrakauns, Daka and Dakka.
Important Recordings / Popular Compositions Based on this Raga.
Yaad Piyaki Aaye - Thumri - Ustad Bade Ghulam Ali Khan ;.
Rajab Ali Khan.
Ustad Rajab Ali Khan was an Indian classical vocalist.
In this way his style was a mix of the Jaipur and Kirana styles.
He was a court musician of Dewas and Kolhapur.
He also performed on concert tours.
He was also a court musician of Ram Singh II of Jaipur State.
His last big concert was held in 1957, in Bombay.
Rajab Ali was known as a master khayaliya but he was also a noted player of Rudra Veena, Sitar and Jaltarang.
Amir Khan was also influenced by his taans.
C. P. Rele.
Dr. C.P. Rele was a Hindustani classical musician who specialized in singing, teaching, and composing khyal.
More about his long musical association and friendship with Kumar Gandharva can be found in his book, Kumar Maajhaa Sakhaa.
This text was published by the Samvaad Foundation.
Sharan Rani Backliwal.
Sharan Rani Backliwal was an Indian classical instrumentalist and music scholar, best known for her expertise with the sarod.
Early life and training.
She also learned the Kathak form of classical Indian dance from Achhan Maharaj and Manipuri dance from Nabha Kumar Sinha.
In 1953, she did her M.A from Delhi University, and studied at Indraprastha College for Women.
She played a vital role in introducing and popularising Indian classical music abroad.
She performed at major music halls around the world and in many major music conferences in India.
She gave many lecture demonstrations in India and abroad.
She never turned down a request for a laudable cause and gave many benefit performances for charitable and worthy causes.
Musical research and teaching.
A second edition of The Divine Sarod was released in 2008 by Shri I.K. Gujral, former Prime Minister of India.
She also wrote a number of articles on music.
Sharan Rani taught music through the Guru - Shishya parampara and never took any fees from her students.
Many students also lived in her house as her resident-disciples for several years, free of charge.
Many of her Indian and foreign students have gained repute in India and abroad.
In India, in the Pre Independence period, there was no museum in Delhi.
No systematic effort had been made to preserve our musical heritage in terms of our musical instruments.
Sharan Rani was a visionary and a ` thinking artist '.
With single minded determination, Sharan Rani took upon herself the onerous challenge of finding and acquiring old and rare musical instruments.
Slowly and consistently over decades and without any outside aid, she built up an unparalleled collection of rare musical instruments.
Indira Gandhi, who called it a ` collection of rare musical instruments of national importance . '.
The Sharan Rani collections highlight almost all the types of instruments used in Indian classical music.
Some folk and tribal instruments are also exhibited in the collections.
She has also collected and gifted investments of great maestros.
One can also see western instruments which have been used for decades as Indian band instruments.
Due to her efforts, in 1998, Govt.
She has with great care restored many old instruments before donating them.
All the instruments were gifted in playing condition.
Sharan Rani actively participated in India 's struggle for freedom.
Over the years, she silently she helped many artists in need and helped many upcoming artists.
Sharan Rani served as the Founder, President and Chairperson of leading music, cultural and educational institutions and organisations.
Sharan Rani was one of the earliest artists of All India Radio and Doordarshan.
In 1960, she married Shri Sultan Singh Backliwal who belonged to a prominent Digamber Jain business family of Delhi.
In 1974, they had a daughter, Radhika Narain.
After battling cancer for a few years, she died on 8 April 2008, a day before her 79th birthday.
Awards and honours.
In 2004, the government of India honoured select artists by conferring upon them the title of National Artiste.
Sharan Rani was the only woman instrumentalist to receive this title.
Sharan Rani also received honorary doctorates in music from universities India and the United States.
Other awards and honours she received include :.
Early life and training.
Swapan Chaudhuris parents, through their own passion for music, initiated his formal musical training.
Swapan Chaudhuri started tabla learning at the age of five.
He also holds a degree in economics from Jadavpur University, Calcutta.
He has participated in many international music festivals such as Bath, Perth, Sydney, Tokyo, San Francisco, Kuala Lampur, Stuttgart, and Berlin.
He has composed for several percussion ensembles, which have received much appreciation from both western and Indian audiences.
He is also a member of the teaching staff at the California Institute of the Arts, Valencia, California.
Lakshmi Shankar passed away on 30th December 2013.
May her soul rest in peace !.
Lakshmi Shankar is a noted Hindustani classical vocalist of the Patiala Gharana.
She is known for her performances of khyal, thumri, and bhajans.
She is sister-in-law to sitar player Ravi Shankar and was the mother-in-law of violinist L. Subramaniam.
Born in 1926, Lakshmi started her career in dancing.
In 1941, she married Uday Shankars brother, Rajendra.
Later, she also trained with Ravi Shankar, the sitar maestro and youngest brother of Rajendra and Uday.
In 1974, Lakshmi performed in Europe as part of Ravi Shankars Music Festival from India.
Following Ravi Shankars heart attack during the tour, she conducted his ensemble of musicians.
Lakshmi Shankar passed away on 30 December 2013 in USA.
May her soul rest in peace !.
Bhalchnadra Panchwadkar, is an Indian accomplished Marathi singer and music director.
He is a well known music director in Marathi Light music.
Panchwadkar devoted his life in Marathi music.
He has two kids.
His son Girish Panchwadkar who is an accomplished Marathi singer and music director from India.
He is a well known singer in Marathi light music.
He has taught music many students under his guidance.
A famous vocalist both in Hindustani and Karnataka Music.
He is the recipient of the Padma Bhushan, Indias third highest civilian honour, awarded in 2008.
He was born into a poor Kannada Lingayat family in Devara Hospete in Hangal taluk of Haveri district of Karnataka.
His parents were Revaiah Venkatapurmath and Siddamma.
He lost his eyesight at a very early age.
He lost his father when he was 10 months old.
His maternal uncle Chandrashekharaiah took him under his wings and raised him.
Seeing Gawais interest in music, his uncle took him to Veereshwara Punyashrama, run by Ganayogi Panchakshara Gawai.
Under the guidance of Panchakshara Gawai, he mastered Hindustani.
He mastered carnatic music under the guidance of Mundarigi Raghavendrachar.
He had mastered many instruments harmonium, tabla, violin and 10 other music instruments.
In devotional music, Pt.
Gawai is most acclaimed for his renditions of vachanas.
His first play Sri Sivayogi Sidharama written and directed by him brought in profit and was applauded.
This was followed by many other successful productions.
He has authored books in Kannada, Hindi and Sanskrit.
He re-wrote the Bhagavad Gita in Braille script.
Disabled people, especially blind from all castes, religions and sections of the society are taught music in the ashram.
Dr. Puttaraj Kavi Gavaiji has been the pontiff of Shree Veereshwara Punyashrama Since 1944, after the demise of Pt.
Panchaxara Gavaiji who founded this Ashrama for the upliftment of the born-blind children and orphans.
The Ashrama is solely run on the strength of voluntary donations by its devotees.
The mission of the Ashrama is selfless service to the community, especially and poorest and the blind.
The disciples trained and educated in Music.
and Fine Arts have become music teachers, stage-artists, radio-artists, musicians and professionals in the field of arts in thousands.
Panchaxari Gavi Drama Theatre organized and founded by Pt.
Punyashrama has produced thousands of Kirtanakaras who are busy delivering Puranas and Pravachanas and Keertanas all over the state.
Thus, Shree Veereshwara Punyashrama is rendering valuable services in the field of literature, music, religion, literacy and social service.
The very secular credentials of this institution has made this Ashrama typical and a class by itself.
The Pontiff of Shree Veereshwara Punyashrama, Gadag is viewed by the devotees as a Walking God on the Earth.
Shree Veereshwara Punyashrama of Gadag is a very popular and influential Ashrama in Karnataka.
It is a charity institution solely dedicated to the upliftment of the blind, orphans and poor children.
More than 1000 children reside in the Ashrama and are fed free of cost.
The Ashrama runs Thirteen institutions comprising musical as well as general education.
Shree Veereshwara Punyashrama is run on its own strength without any aid from the Government.
The pontiff, Pt.
Puttaraj Kavi Gavaiji has been serving out society in different capacities and is a catalyst of social and communal harmony.
He richly deserves any coveted prize and honour like Padma Vibhushan Award.
Gawai has taught many students which presently runs to a count of more than 1000 visually impaired.
Some of his well-known students are :.
Shree Veershwara Punyashrama is running various Institutions.
More than 1 million devotees attended his funeral ceremony in Gadag on 18 September 2010.
Some of his important works are listed below.
Awards and Recognitions.
Pt Gawai has been bestowed with many awards for his contributions to music, literature and social service.
Some important awards are listed below.
Rag Shankara, Rag Mala in Jogia.
Rag Shankara, Rag Mala in Jogia is a studio album by Indian classical musician Ram Narayan, released in 1990.
The album consists of performances of the ragas Shankara and Jogiya ; Jogiya is performed in raga mala form.
Shankara is considered a solemn and dignified raga that is difficult to master.
It has been described by Vamanrao Deshpande as representing the heroic mood.
Luiz Martinez Jose argued that the raga was named for a gentle and guarding incarnation of the Hindu deity Shiva.
It has similarities to the South Indian raga Hansadhvani.
Peter Manuel described it as the most important raga of the Bhairav that.
Jogiya is performed at daybreak and emphasizes the tonic and the fifth.
It has several characteristic phrases and, like Shankara, is suited for the upper tetrachord.
Joep Bor argued that the raga appears to be related to raga Asavari.
Jogiya is one of Narayans favorite ragas.
A raga mala allows for the introduction of other ragas, which can be from any time of the day.
Recording and artwork.
Rag Shankara, Rag Mala in Jogia was recorded on 15 and 16 November 1989 in Wyastone Leys near Monmouth, Wales.
Narayan begins the performances by playing a long alap and jor.
The album cover features a painting made ca. 1760 in Murshidabad in the provincial Mughal style of Bengal.
A picture of Narayan with his sarangi, taken by Joseph Stieger, is on the back of the album.
Asavari is a Hindustani classical raga.
It belongs to the Asavari that and is performed in the morning hours.
Samavadi : ga.
Important Anuvaadi : P. Organization and relationships.
The ragas closest to Asavari are Komal Rishabh Asavari and Jaunpuri and it is part of the Kanada Raga group.
Neela Bhagwats other teacher is Jal Balaporia.
Known for composing and performing thumris from a feminist perspective, her contributions include compositions of Kabir and Meera bhajans.
Vijay Raghav Rao.
Pandit Vijay Raghav Rao was an Indian flutist, composer, choreographer, musicologist, poet and fiction writer.
He was born in Madras, India.
He was married since 1947 to Smt.
Lakshmi V. Rao.
They have four children, nine grandchildren and one great-grandchild.
He was an Indian-American, a permanent resident of the United States.
Through the past six decades, Pt.
Vijay Raghav Rao has shaped and influenced the essential form and derivatives of culture known to the world as classically Indian.
His genius has also expressed itself in critically acclaimed works for modern orchestra and ballet ensembles.
Several award winning features and short films shown at some of the most prestigious international film festivals carry his experimental music.
Critics and connoisseurs of his expression in Asia, Europe and America have responded with meaningful praise.
To note a few -.
No substitute for his flute ... the complete master - The Hindustan Times.
A volcano of creative expression - The Indian Express.
One of the greatest flautists of this world ... - The Times of India.
His flute is an unending fountain of myriad melodies, always fresh, always original ...  - The Patriot.
Creator of beautiful, wide and ethereal canvasses ... - The Deccan Herald.
20th Century Renaissance Genius - The Cleveland Plain Dealer.
Awe Inspiring ... Innovative & Imaginative Vitality ... - The Statesman.
Intensely romantic ... lyrical ... extremely serene ... - Rave Magazine.
Innovator in the world of music.
a versatile genius.,  - - The JS Magazine.
In 2008, he received the Aditya Birla Kala Shikhar award from the Governor of Maharashtra.
He was a member of the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences.
As a poet, Panditji has published five well - received anthologies of poems and short stories in English and Telugu.
and notes in scales that have not changed in two thousand years.
And it may be said that over half a century, Pt.
Udai Mazumdar, is an Indian tabla player, music producer and composer.
Udai was born in Allahabad, and started learning tabla when he turned seven.
His initial training was in vocal music.
In 1981, he approached Pandit Ashutosh Bhattacharya for further training.
Udai has performed for the Royal Families of Britain and Sweden.
He has accompanied Pandit Ravi Shankar at various occasions.
Udai has broadcast on Radio DRS in Switzerland, BBC TV and Radio France.
Udai was born in a family of musicians.
His father, the Late Partho Sarathy Mazumdar, is among the first-generation of guitarists in the field of Indian Classical music.
Udai married Filomena Bianculli.
They have one son, Jay Mazumdar and one daughter, Isha Mazumdar.
Now, based in Basel, Switzerland and New Delhi, India, Udai is engaged in concerts, composing and teaching students.
Shamim Ahmed Khan.
Shamim Ahmed Khan was a sitarist and composer, and notably, a student of Pandit Ravi Shankar.
His solo recording debut was at the age of 29.
Shamim had performed in Carnegie Hall, at the Lincoln Center, at the Griffith Center, among other concert halls.
However, after a bout of typhoid, Shamim Ahmed steered away from singing to turn towards his true passion for the sitar.
His father introduced him to Pandit Ravi Shankar, informing the maestro about his sons interest in music.
In later years, Shamim Ahmed characterized his teacher briefly, in three words, discipline, devotion, compassion.
Those who knew Ustad Shamim Ahmed Khan, would consider him too as humble and modest.
A traditional formal thread ceremony had marked the occasion, binding the two men in a guru-shishya parampara i.e. teacher-student relationship.
In 1958, he was a recipient of the Government of India music scholarship.
Shamim Ahmed Khans US solo recording debut was along with then young Zakir Hussain as tabla accompanist.
Rahul Deshpande is an Indian classical music singer and actor from Pune, India.
He is the grandson of the well-known late Pandit Vasantrao Deshpande of Patiala Gharana.
Revised Sangeet Maanapmaan.
It has been revised by Rahul Deshpande.
Originally, the play has five parts with around 52 classical songs.
Deshpandes version will have two parts and 22 classical songs.
K. G. Ginde.
Krishna Gundopant Ginde was a Hindustani classical singer, teacher, composer, and scholar.
His guru Shrikrishna Narayan Ratanjankar was his biggest influence.
He showed interest in music from an early age and devoted his entire life to its pursuit.
He moved to Mumbai in 1951 to take up a teaching post with Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan.
In 1962 he became principal of Vallabh Sangeet Vidyalaya.
His knowledge of raagdari music was comprehensive.
He would demonstrate various facets of a raag or a raagaang in seminars or lecture demonstrations.
Pandit Ginde died on July 13, 1994 in Calcutta after suffering a massive heart attack.
Tara Bir Singh Tuladhar.
Tara Bir Singh Tuladhar or Taravirasimha Tuladhara, is a Nepalese artist and composer on the classical string instrument Sitar.
Tara Bir Singh Tuladhar lives in Lalitpur, Kathmandu Valley, Nepal.
Training and musical work.
He still continues in giving a classical North Indian Sitar class at Kathmandu University 's Department of Music in Bhaktapur.
Earlier he played for seven years in the Royal Nepal Academy orchestra.
Since 1994 he is also teaching the Sitar class of GEMS high school at Sanepa height, Lalitpur.
He has been considered as individual Nepalese artist reference by the American Library Association.
Tara Bir Singh Tuladhar has recorded several music albums, both solo and accompanied by other artists.
Nepal Sitar, Sitar Kaasa, Symbol of Nepal and Festivals of Nepal are four of his most popular music albums.
The solo album  Nepal Sitar  was recognized with the German award  Preis der Deutschen Schallplattenkritik in 1985.
Sitarist Tara Bir Singh Tuladhar in Portrait by Channel Nepal TV, ,,.
Interview by Nepal TV, ,, ,.
Paul Livingstone is an American sitarist, composer and multi-instrumentalist.
He is one of the few American disciples of Pt.
Ravi Shankar, also trained under Rajeev Taranath and Amiya Dasgupta all of the Senia Maihar Gharana.
Paul began his study of sitar and tabla at age 15 living in India.
He has performed classical raga music with several of the leading tabla players of India and Nepal including Pt.
Swapan Chaudhuri, Abhijit Banerjee, Shashanka Bakshi and Hom Nath Upadhaya.
Paul also performs on fretless guitar and Requinto jarocho of his own design.
, and Build an Ark.
Paul also published Sitar Talim a workbook for learning sitar.
Salil Bhatt is an Indian slide guitar player.
He created the musical instrument Satvik Veena.
He is the son of the fellow slide player and Grammy Award winner, Padmashree Pt.
Vishwa Mohan Bhatt.
His latest album, Slide to Freedom 2 - Make a Better World, was nominated for a Canadian Juno Award.
The sarangi is a bowed, short-necked string instrument from South Asia which is used in Hindustani classical music.
The term seh-rangi represents the three melody strings.
Sarangi now enjoys the status of a solo classical instrument due to the single-handed efforts of Ram Narayan.
There is a variation to the fingering technique that was used by Ram Narayan.
It differs from the standard fingering as to when one shifts from the first finger to the second finger.
The repertoire of sarangi players is traditionally very closely related to vocal music.
As such, it is on a par with other instrumental styles such as for sitar, sarod, and bansuri.
Sarangi music is often vocal music.
It is rare to find a sarangi player who does not know the words of many classical compositions.
The neck has ivory/bone platforms on which the fingers slide.
These are tuned to the important tones of the raga.
Three historic sarangi from The Metropolitan Museum of Art.
Abhay Rustum Sopori is a Kashmiri Indian instrumentalist, composer & conductor of musical performances.
He is a player of santoor, an ancient stringed musical instrument native to Kashmir.
Early life and family.
Sopori hails from Srinagar in Kashmir Valley and traces his lineage to ancient Santoor experts.
He belongs to the Sufiana gharana of Indian classical music.
His family has played santoor for over seven generations.
Style & contributions.
A unique quality of his performances is that he sings along with his instrumental renderings.
Abhay is known for his energetic performances, which involve rhythmic and melodic patterns.
Associated with Spicmacay, Abhay continues his research in music studies.
His efforts to promote music and musicians includes Haft Rang which consists of an ensemble of 80 folk musicians.
The troupe consists of lesser known musicians that were earlier lost in ignominy.
It includes both educated musicians who can read notes as well as illiterate musicians who have a keen sense of music.
Abhay Rustum Sopori won the first prize in state music competition when he was 10 years old.
Abhay started his musical career in 1997 from his first concert in Delhi.
He has also learned Western Classical Music.
Abhay Rustum Sopori has around thirty albums and releases, and he has given performances around the world.
His performances abroad include those in the USA, Japan, Korea, Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand, among other nations.
Abhay has also played the signature tune for Indian news channel Aaj Tak.
The ensemble was performed at the Jammu and Kashmir festival at the Indira Gandhi National center for arts in New Delhi.
Sopori has also composed music for documentaries.
Abhay Sopori won the Ustaad Bismillah Khan Yuva Puruskar in 2006.
He was the youngest ever recipient of the award.
Sopori was conferred with the Juenjo Korean international heritage award in 2005.
Abdul Wahid Khan.
Abdul Wahid Khan was an Indian classical singer, from the Kirana gharana.
Early life and background.
Abdul Wahid Khan initially learned vocal and sarangi from his father, Abdul Majid Khan.
Around age 12 he moved to Kolhapur to learn from Haider Baksh Khan, a disciple of Bande Ali Khan.
Khansahib founded the Kirana gharana musical family with Abdul Karim Khan.
Abdul Karim had married Abdul Wahid Khans sister, Gafooran Bibi.
The relationship between Khan and Abdul Karim later soured when Abdul Karim neglected Gafooran Bibi and married his student, Tarabai Mane.
Abdul Wahid Khans hearing was deficient and he was sometimes referred to as Behre Wahid Khan.
Wahid Khans son Hafizullah Khan was born in 1946.
Hafizullahs uncles trained him in music, and he became an accomplished sarangi player.
Khansahib forbade recordings of his performances to avoid imitation by other singers.
Abdul Wahid Khansahib died in 1949 in Lahore.
A number of Wahid Khans students became renowned musicians.
Khansahib influenced Amir Khan.
Lewis Brian Hopkins Jones was the founder and original bandleader of the Rolling Stones.
Jones was a multi-instrumentalist, with his main instruments being the guitar, the harmonica and the keyboards.
He developed a serious drug problem over the years and his role in the band steadily diminished.
He was asked to leave the Rolling Stones in June 1969 and guitarist Mick Taylor took his place in the group.
Original Rolling Stones bassist Bill Wyman said of Jones, He formed the band.
He chose the members.
He named the band.
He chose the music we played.
He got us gigs.
Early life and paternity.
Jones was born in the Park Nursing Home in Cheltenham, Gloucestershire, on 28 February 1942.
An attack of croup at the age of four left him with asthma, which lasted for the rest of his life.
His middle-class parents, Lewis Blount Jones and Louisa Beatrice Jones were of Welsh descent.
In 1957 Jones first heard Cannonball Adderley s music, which inspired his interest in jazz.
He enjoyed badminton and diving at school and attained first clarinet in the school orchestra.
In 1957 he reportedly obtained seven O-level passes, then he continued into the sixth form and obtained a further two O-levels.
He also took three A-levels in Physics, Chemistry and Biology and passed in Physics and Chemistry, but failed in Biology.
Jones had an IQ of 135 and was able to perform well in exams despite a lack of academic effort.
However, he found school regimented and disliked conforming.
He disliked the school uniforms and angered teachers with his behaviour, though he was popular with classmates.
His hostility to authority figures resulted in his suspension from school on two occasions.
In late summer 1959, Joness 17-year-old girlfriend, a Cheltenham schoolgirl named Valerie Corbett, became pregnant.
Jones quit school in disgrace and left home, travelling for a summer through Northern Europe and Scandinavia.
Eventually, he ran short of money and returned to England.
Jones listened to classical music as a child, but preferred blues, particularly Elmore James and Robert Johnson.
He began performing at local blues and jazz clubs, while busking and working odd jobs.
He reportedly stole small amounts of money from work to pay for cigarettes, for which he was fired.
In November 1959, Jones went to the Wooden Bridge Hotel in Guildford to see a band perform.
He met a young married woman named Angeline, and the two had a one-night stand that resulted in her pregnancy.
Angeline and her husband decided to raise the baby, a girl, born on 4 August the following year.
Jones never knew about her birth.
In 1961, Jones applied for a scholarship to Cheltenham Art College.
On 23 October 1961, Joness girlfriend Pat Andrews gave birth to his third child, Julian Mark Andrews.
Jones sold his record collection to buy flowers for Pat and clothes for the newborn.
He lived with them for a while.
On 23 July 1964, another woman, Linda Lawrence, gave birth to Joness fourth child, named Julian Brian.
She received a cheque for PS700 from Andrew Loog Oldham, LTD.
The undated statement was signed by Malloy and witnessed by Mick.
Forming the Rolling Stones.
He became a blues musician, for a brief time calling himself Elmo Lewis, and playing slide guitar.
Jagger brought guitarist Richards to rehearsals ; Richards then joined the band.
The voice on the other end of the line obviously said, What are you called ?.
The Best of Muddy Waters album was lying on the floor -- and track five, side one was Rollin ` Stone.
Jones and Richards spent day after day playing guitar while listening to blues records.
During this time, Jones also taught Jagger how to play harmonica.
Watts described Joness role in these early days : Brian was very instrumental in pushing the band at the beginning.
Keith and I would look at him and say he was barmy.
In 1964 and 1965 he often used a teardrop-shaped prototype Vox Mark III.
From late 1965 until his death, Jones used Gibson models, as well as two Rickenbacker 12-string models.
He can also be seen playing a Fender Telecaster in the 1968 Jumpin Jack Flash promo video.
Jones also played harmonica on many of the Rolling Stones early songs.
, Cool Calm and Collected, Whos Been Sleeping Here, and Dear Doctor and Prodigal Son.
In the early years, Jones often served as a backing vocalist.
He contributed backing vocals as late as 1968 on Sympathy For The Devil.
He is also responsible for the whistling on Walking the Dog.
From 1966 onwards Joness contributions in the recording studio were more as a multi-instrumentalist than as a guitarist.
Estrangement from bandmates.
Further, Oldham wanted to make Jaggers charisma and flamboyance a focus of live performances.
According to Oldham in his book Stoned, Jones was an outsider from the beginning.
He resisted the symbiosis demanded by the group lifestyle, and so life was becoming more desperate for him day by day.
None of us were looking forward to Brian totally cracking up.
He frequently used LSD, pills, and cannabis, and he drank heavily.
These excesses had a debilitative effect on his physical health and, according to Oldham, Jones became unfriendly and asocial at times.
His health problems caused him to be hospitalised on a number of occasions.
Jones was arrested for drug possession on 10 May 1967, shortly after the Redlands incident at Richards Sussex home.
Authorities found marijuana, cocaine, and methamphetamine in his flat.
He confessed to marijuana use but claimed he did not use hard drugs.
Reacting as fans did at the arrests of Joness band mates, protesters appeared outside court demanding that Jones be freed.
He was not kept in jail but was fined, given probation, and ordered to see a counselor.
In June 1967, Jones attended the Monterey Pop Festival with singer Nico, with whom he had a brief relationship.
One review referred to Jones as the unofficial king of the festival.
Hostility grew between Jones, Jagger, and Richards, alienating Jones further from the group.
As tensions and Joness substance use increased, his musical contributions became sporadic.
He became bored with the guitar and sought exotic instruments to play, and he was increasingly absent from recording sessions.
In Peter Whiteheads promotional film for We Love You, made in July 1967, he appears groggy.
The film chronicles the making of Sympathy for the Devil.
It was clear Jones was not long for the group.
Where once he played multiple instruments on many tracks, now he played only minor roles on a few pieces.
Departure from the band.
He was facing a long jail sentence if found guilty owing to his probation.
Brian and the Stones were being targeted in an effort to deter the public from taking drugs.
In March 1969, Jones borrowed the groups Jaguar and went shopping in Pimlico Road.
After the parked car was towed by police Jones hired a chauffeur car to get home.
From this point, Jones was still attending recording sessions but was no longer a major contributor to the bands music.
The photos would appear on the album Through The Past Darkly in September 1969.
However, the Stones management was informed that because of his drug convictions Jones would not receive a work permit.
Jones released a statement on 9 June 1969, announcing his departure.
Jones was replaced by 20-year-old guitarist Mick Taylor.
There is uncertainty as to the mental and physical state Jones was in.
and Chow Time.
However, by the time the doctors arrived it was too late and he was pronounced dead.
The coroners report stated death by misadventure and noted his liver and heart were heavily enlarged by drug and alcohol abuse.
Many items such as instruments and expensive furniture were reportedly stolen from the home after Joness death.
Rumours also exist that recordings by Jones for his future projects were stolen but nothing has surfaced to date.
A watch given by Alexis Korner to Jones with a personal inscription surfaced in an auction at Christies in New York.
While Thinking of Brian Jones, Deceased.
Hendrix and Morrison both died within the following two years, both aged 27, the same as Jones.
The Rolling Stones performed at a free concert in Hyde Park on 5 July 1969, two days after Joness death.
The band opened with a Johnny Winter song that was one of Joness favourites, Im Yours and Im Hers.
Jones was reportedly buried deep in Cheltenham Cemetery in a lavish casket sent by Bob Dylan.
Watts and Wyman were the only Rolling Stones who attended the funeral.
Keith Richards reportedly remained in the recording studio.
When asked if he felt guilty about Joness death Mick Jagger told Rolling Stone in 1995 : No, I dont really.
I wasnt understanding enough about his drug addiction.
No one seemed to know much about drug addiction.
Things like LSD were all new.
No one knew the harm.
People thought cocaine was good for you.
Theories surrounding Joness death developed soon afterwards with associates of the Stones claiming to have information that he was murdered.
According to rock biographer Philip Norman, the murder theory would bubble back to the surface every five years or so.
In 1993 it was reported that Jones was murdered by Frank Thorogood, who was doing some construction work on the property.
He was the last person to see Jones alive.
Thorogood allegedly confessed to the murder to the Rolling Stones driver, Tom Keylock, who later denied this.
The Thorogood theory was dramatised in the 2005 movie Stoned.
Following the review the Sussex police stated that they would not be reopening the case.
As such, the case will not be reopened.
Unsure and insecure as a composer, Jones was not a prolific songwriter.
When asked in 1965 if he had written songs, Jones replied : Always tried.
Ive written quite a few, but mostly in blues style.
Many years later after his death, Keith Richards stated : No, no, absolutely not.
That was the one thing he would never do.
Brian wouldnt show them to anybody within the Stones.
Ive never known a guy with less talent for songwriting.
Victor Bockris reported that Keith Richards and Brian Jones worked out the final melody in the studio.
Additionally, Jones is credited for the instrumental piece Hear It, though it is generally considered Joness work.
Although guitarist Jimmy Page is one of the three extra musicians Jones hired to play on the soundtrack.
It appeared on the album True Voices, performed by Krysia Kristianne and Robin Williamson.
Brian Jones Presents the Pipes of Pan at Jajouka was rereleased in cooperation with Bachir Attar and Philip Glass in 1995.
In mid-May 1967, Jones played oboe on The Beatles Baby, Youre a Rich Man.
Public image and legend.
Jones was tall with blue-grey eyes and blond hair.
Bo Diddley described Brian as a little dude that was trying to pull the group ahead.
I saw him as the leader.
He didnt take no mess.
He was a fantastic cat ; he handled the group beautifully.
The coincidence of ages has been described as the 27 Club.
Johns noted that Cotchford Farm remained for decades an attraction for Joness fans.
The Master Musicians of Joujouka song Brian Jones Joujouka Very Stoned was released in 1974 and 1996.
The Brian Jonestown Massacre band named itself partially after him.
The 2005 film Stoned is a fictional account of Jones and his role in the Rolling Stones.
The part of Brian was played by English actor Leo Gregory.
His exceptional musicianship as well as contribution to the band is featured heavily in the documentary Crossfire Hurricane.
Pandit Santosh Joshi is an Indian vocalist in the Hindustani classical tradition.
He is a member of the Joshi Gharana, which is a branch of the Lucknow tabla gharana.
He is known for the khyal form of singing, as well as for his popular renditions of devotional bhajans and Hori.
He is the most recent recipient of the Rajiv Ratna Award of Bikaner.
Santosh Joshi was born into a Pushtikar Brahmin family in Bikaner.
Santosh Joshis elder brother Paramanand also played tabla and sitar.
Musical training and career.
He is also a B-high grade artist of All India Radio.
Over the years, his repertoire has tended to favor a relatively small number of complex and serious ragas.
Some of his more popular ragas include Shuddha Sarang, Kalashree, Madhuvanti, Kirwani, Malkauns, Shankara, Patdeep, Charukeshi, Gorakh Kalyan and Vachaspati.
His singing is mostly influenced by musicians such as D.V. Paluskar, Bhimsen Joshi, Rajan-Sajan Mishra, and Ajoy Chakraborty.
Joshi assimilated into his own singing various elements that he liked in different musical styles.
Joshi has attempted to popularize Hindustani classical music by giving various stage performances.
He is currently teaching at the Government M.S. College in Bikaner.
He has also taught many students including his daughter and son.
Streets of Bollywood.
Streets of Bollywood is a compilation album of songs from Bollywood movies, remixed by British Asian music artists.
Among the artists are Hunterz, Metz & Trix, and Kami K.
Several of the artists would also feature on the later similarly themed Bollywood Breaks Vol.
Listing is in the format : Original name - Remix name.
Rajat Kumar Mishra.
Rajat Kumar Mishra, is an Indian artist and tabla player.
He is received an CTS Scholarship from the Indian government and felicitations from 20 leading organisations.
He also gave some important stage performances in various cities in the country.
Rajat is honoured with the National Child Award for Exceptional Achievement for his excellent performance in Tabla playing.
Anand Bhate also known as Anand Gandharva is a Hindustani classical vocalist from the Kirana Gharana.
He is popular for his classical singing of songs from the Marathi film Balgandharva.
Early life and training.
Anand Bhate was born in Pune, India in 1971, in a family active in classical music.
By the age of 10, he had started systematic training in classical singing from Chandrashekhar Deshpande.
He began his training under Yashwantbua Marathe, who introduced him to some of the intricacies of Khayal gayaki.
Later he became a disciple of late Bhimsen Joshi, with whom he trained for 15 years.
He has recently sung all the tracks for the lead character of a Marathi bio-pic of Balgandharva.
Khyal is the modern genre of classical singing in North India.
Its name comes from an Arabic word meaning imagination.
It is not thought to have developed out of the qawwa.
It appeared more recently than dhrupad, is a more free and flexible form, and it provides greater scope for improvisation.
Like all Indian classical music, khyal is modal, with a single melodic line and no harmonic parts.
The modes are called raga, and each raga is a complicated framework of melodic rules.
Khyal bases itself on a repertoire of short songs ; a khyal song is called a bandish.
Every singer generally renders the same bandish differently, with only the text and the raga remaining the same.
As the songs are short, and performances long, the lyrics lose some of their importance.
Taans are one of the major distinguishing features of the khyal.
Now and then, the singer returns to the song, especially its first line, as a point of reference.
Besides the vilambit and drut tempos, a performance may include ati-vilambit, madhya and ati-drut tempos.
Song forms such as taranas, thumris or tappas are sometimes used to round off a khyal performance.
Khayal was popularized by Niyamat Khan and his nephew Firoz Khan, both musicians in the court of Muhammad Shah Rangile.
It seems likely that khyal already existed at the time, although perhaps not in the present form.
The compositions of Sadarang and Adarang employ the theme of Hindi love-poetry.
The gharana system arose out of stylistic rendering of the khyal by various subsequent generations of musicians.
Today, as always, a singer is expected to develop an individual style, albeit one that is demonstrably linked to tradition.
Also in the same year, Surinder Singh was awarded the Padma Shri by the Government of India.
They started learning music during the childhood from elder brother G.S. Sardar.
They also did Masters in music from Allahabad University.
Subsequently they learned khayal singing from Ustad Amir Khan the founder of Indore Gharana.
The couple lives in Delhi.
Pandit Shivnath Mishra is an Indian sitarist and composer.
He is an exponent of the Benares Gharana school of Hindustani classical music.
He was formerly a lecturer and the Head of the Music Department at the Sampurnanand Sanskrit University, Varanasi.
A 2011 ITV documentary described Pandit Shivnath, along with his son Deobrat, as household names on the Indian music scene.
At the age of eight, he started learning the sitar.
As a youth he played with Ravi Shankar and turned down the opportunity to study with him.
In 1967, Mishra won the prestigious All India Radio competition held at Allahabad.
This was followed by a gold medal at the All India Music Conference in Calcutta in 1967.
Mr. Mishra has played at several prestigious music festivals including Sangeet Natak Academy in 1993.
He has played many times in Ganga Mahotsav Cultural Program organized by the government of Uttar Pradesh.
He has played Sitar with great Master Padmabhushan Late Pt.
Samta Prasad, Padmashri Pt.
Kishan Maharaj, Late Pt.
Nanhku Maharaj, Pt.
Lachhu Maharaj and also Sarod player Aashish Khan.
He is a prominent A class Artist in All India Radio and TV.
He has shown his art in many Indian movies also.
Mishra has toured extensively internationally including to Italy, Germany and the United States.
Academy Of Indian Classical Music.
The Academy aims to :.
The academy is notable for admitting non-Indian musicians including those from Europe and the USA.
Activism through music.
Mr. Mishra is known for supporting social movements through his music.
He has organized several charity events to support social organizations.
Kashinath Mukherjee is a Hindustani classical musician and sitar player of Etawah Gharana.
Kashinath Mukherjee was born in Kolkata into an aristocratic family having a rich cultural heritage.
His father Shital Chandra Mukherjee was a scientist specialized in chemistry, as well as a learned dhrupad singer.
He is younger brother of film director Hrishikesh Mukherjee.
His family consists of academics.
Inspired by elder brother Hrishikesh Mukherjee, he started to play sitar, before starting to learn formally.
Later he learned Sitar from Srinivas Nag for twelve years.
After the death of Srinivas Nag, he was under tutelage of Ustad Vilayat Khan, one of the greatest sitarist.
During this period he kept away from public appearances, as directed by his Ustad.
Due to his inclination towards Amir Khans singing, he learned from Amir Khan until Khans death.
Mukherjee has participated in concerts in India and abroad.
He is the recipient of the ITC Sangeet Samman award among others.
Ramprapanna Bhattacharya and Abhik Mukherjee are among his most prominent disciples.
Ustad Shahid Parvez Khan is a sitar player of Hindustani classical music.
He carries on a legacy of sitar playing that goes back several generations in his family.
He belongs to the famous Etawah Gharana and belongs to the seventh generation of this musical lineage.
He is one of India 's most celebrated younger musicians, praised especially for the vocalistic phrasing of his raga improvisations.
Born in Mumbai, India.
Shahid Parvez was recognized as a child prodigy and had started performing in public at the age of eight.
Tremendous perseverance and hard work over the years have been rewarded with an outstanding technical prowess and a mastery over Layakari.
He identifies himself with Raga Yaman, Darbari, Malkauns, Marwa, Todi and Shree.
Shahid Parvezs students include Shakir Khan and Sameep Kulkarni.
Jog and Piloo.
Darbari & Sahana.
Jhinjhoti and Bhairavi.
Deshkar, Mand, Hansdhwani, Tilak Kamod.
Darbari Kanada with Subhen Chatterjee.
Mian Ki Malhar, Gavati, Pilu, Pahadi.
with E Gayathri Hindustani / Carnatic Music Mahaganpathim, Naatai Adi Taalam.
with Rashid Khan - Bageshri & Desh.
Ahir Bhairav and Bhairavi Dhun.
Gurjari Todi & Rageshri, Bhairavi Dhun.
Bairagi Bhairavi, Puryia, Dhun in Mishra Kammaj.
Jaijaiwanti & Charukeshi.
Jog & Mishra Khammaj.
Shahana & Megh Malhar, Mishra Pilu.
Bageshri, Rageshri, Jogkauns with Subhen Chatterjee.
Yaman, Bhinna Shadaj.
Bilaskhani Todi, Desh, Dhun in Bhatiali.
Sudh Sarang, Ahir Bhairav.
Malkauns, Gujri Todi, Bhairavi Dhun.
Jhinjhoti, Puriya Dhanashri, Mishra Shivranjani.
Sam is composition of words in Rigvedic hymns from notes.
The hymns of Rigveda form the base of Samagan.
Samagan is purpose of creation of Samaveda.
Sam is singing of hymns from Rigveda alone and not from other Veda-s.
richi adhyoodham sam Rci adhyuuddhrm saam.
Hence Sam is composition of words in Rigvedic hymns into notes.
The richa-s or hymns of Rigveda are called yoni or adhar as they form the base of Samgan.
In musicological parlance Sam Veda has taken matu from Rigveda and provided dhatu to these words.
Parts of Sam Veda.
Archik.aarcik Only a few hymns in Sam Veda Samhita were not based upon richa-s taken from Rigveda.
The bulk being based on Rigveda is known as Archik.
It has two parts.
puurvaarcik 585 Richa-s are sub-grouped into 6 Prapathak-s.
Each Prapathak has two Ardh-s.
Each Ardh has 10 Dashati-s.
A collection of ten is called a Dashati.
arnnyk smhitaa It is merely a collection of verses that could be sung.
Branches of Sam.
In Samtarpan there are a maximum of 13 Acharya-s but today there are only three branches.
Ran #aneeya raannaaniiy.
Relationship of Archik and Gan-grantha.
Archik grantha contains hymns that are yoni or base to Gan or singing.
The collections of suitably modified richa-s are known as Gan-grantha.
These are the true Sam.
Sam created on richa-s of Poorvarchik are called Gram-gan, graamgaan Gramegeya-gan, graamgeyogaan Prakriti-gan prkRtigaan or Veya-gan veygaan.
Sam created on richa-s of Aranyak Samhita are termed Aranya-gan arnnyaagaan or Aranyageya-gan arnnygeyogaan.
Sam created on richa-s of Uttararchik are known as Ooh-gan.
The Sanskrit root ooh means to modify according to need.
Application of Gan-s.
Gramgeyo-gan : Sung in villages or towns.
Aranyageya-gan : Practiced in solitude of forest.
Also called Rahasyageyo-gan.
Ooh-gan : Pragath-s specially created for yajna on basis of Gramgeyo-gan.
Oohya-gan uuhygaan : Pragath-s created for yajna on basis of Rahasyageyo-gan.
There is a difference in number of songs attributed to different branches.
Shri Satvalekar in preface to Samveda Samhita has given the following table of songs.
Gram or Scale of Samveda.
Fox Strangways in Music of Hindustan says, Vocal scales are conceived downwards.
Swara of Sam.
In Naradiya Shiksha the seven notes of Sam are First, Second, Third, Fourth, Mandra, Krushta and Atiswar.
This indicates that initially only three or four notes were used for Samgan.
Archik songs were sung on the basis of just one note, e.g. Sa Sa Sa, or Ni Ni Ni.
This kind of chanting was well suited to Havan, Mantra-path and Jap.
Gathik songs were hymns in praise of deities and used two notes, e.g. Ni Ni Ni Ni, Sa Sa Sa Sa.
Samic songs for the first time used three notes.
The word Samic is taken to mean three notes.
The songs were like Ga Ga Re Re Sa Sa Sa.
Apart from these three basic notes, the singers came across a fourth which they called Swarantar.
When they discovered a note lower than the lowest known note they called it Mandra.
When a still lower note than Mandra was found they called it Atiswar.
A higher note determined was called Krushta after Sanskrit root Krush.
So the complete Samic Saptak in descending order contains :.
To preserve the Samik notes, Raga Sameshwari was created.
Shruti-jati is defined as the way in which a particular note could be applied to make the song appealing.
There are five with individual signs for three shruti-jati-s.
The hymn part of the Vedas are called Samhitas.
The Upanisads and the Aranyakas became in turn appendices to the Brahmanas.
Upanishad or Vedanta deal with systematic treatment of metaphysical questions and form the philosophical basis of Hinduism.
They are dated from 1000 BC to 300 BC, the end of the Vedic period to the beginning of Puranic period.
The Pre-Buddha time is considered Early Brahmana period and Post-Buddha period is considered the Later Brahmana period.
The oral texts were composed by a great number of rishis.
Though upanishads number more than a hundred, there are about 8 to 12 principal ones.
All upanishads are based on one of the four Vedas.
Envisioned are beings beyond the range of human senses, conceived from self-evident knowledge and realized Truth by direct intuition.
Rishi Vamadeva, in hymn describes himself as the illumined one, expressing his Truth revealed.
The term Rishi is defined as rishati jnanena samsara-param  meaning one who goes beyond the mundane world by means of knowledge.
Further, some scholars think the root drish might have given rise to root rish meaning to see.
Rishi is therefore a divine seer, a drastara, one who visualizes a mantra.
Also the one who hears the voices and song.
The seers were the hearers of the Truth.
Sri Aurobindo described Shruthi as divine recordings of cosmic sounds of truth heard by the Rishis.
The Vedas are thus Shruthis, revealed scriptures.
That is the reason, the Vedas are Apaurusheya, not authored by any agency.
The Rig Veda contains 10,552 hymns ; grouped into 1,028 Sukthas each of roughly ten mantras, spread over ten Mandalas.
The Mandalas are of differing sizes.
These mantra songs are authored by some 400 Rishis of whom about 30 were women.
Books 1, 8 and 10 composed by different individual Rishis.
The Book 9 is different from the rest ; all the hymns therein are addressed to Soma, from groups of Rishis.
The tenth Book is an addition of various early and late hymns.
Books 1 and 10 are the latest and longest, accounting for about 40 percent of the bulk of the Rig Veda.
Certain texts called Anukramani serve as Index to the Rig Veda and provide information about each hymn of the Rig Veda.
The most well-known of the Aukramani is Katyayana 's sarvanukramani and is dated around the 2nd century.
These are extremely useful in historical analysis of the Rig Veda.
Rajan and Sajan Mishra.
Rajan and Sajan Mishra are brothers, renowned singers of the khyal style of Indian classical music.
Rajan and Sajan Mishra were born and brought up in Varanasi.
They moved to Ramesh Nagar in Delhi, in 1977, where they continue to live.
They were both accountants in a small shop when they gave a performance in the presences of Satguru Jagjit Singh.
^ Find the biography and awards of the Rajan Sajan Mishra.
R. Visweswaran was an Indian classical musician, and master of santoor.
Visweswaran belonged to a family of musicians, and was the nephew of G.N. Balasubramaniam.
He was trained to play hindustani music on the santoor by Pandit Shivkumar Sharma.
He performed at UK, Germany, France, Italy, Austria, Switzerland, Malaysia, Singapore, Fiji, USA, Australia, and the Middle East.
He was a graded artist of All India Radio.
Laxmi Ganesh Tewari.
Pandit Laxmi Ganesh Tewari is a renowned Hindustani vocalist from India.
He is an exponent of the Gwalior gharana of vocal music.
After studying with Dr. Lalmani Misra at Banaras Hindu University in Varanasi, he pursued education and teaching opportunities in America.
At Sonoma State University since 1974, his career has combined performance, scholarship and teaching.
Early life and education.
He moved to the United States to study at Wesleyan University, where he earned a Ph.D. in ethnomusicology in 1974.
Tewari has been on the faculty of Sonoma State University in California since 1974.
Today he is one of the leading ethnomusicologists with an exemplary body of work on Indian, Buddhist, Arabian and Gamelan music.
He has conducted field research in India, Turkey, Trinidad & Tobago, Thailand, Fiji, Ghana, and Zimbabwe.
Documentary Recordings from Field Research.
Malabika Kanan was a Hindustani classical vocalist.
She was born in Lucknow to Rabindralal Roy, a musicologist.
She was married to another singer, A. Kanan.
She received the ITC Sangeet Research Academy Award in 1995 and the Sangeet Natak Akademi Award in 1999-2000.
She died February 17, 2009 in Calcutta.
Dhamar is one of the talas used in Hindustani classical music.
It is associated with the dhrupad style and typically played on the pakhawaj.
Dhamar tala has 14 beats grouped asymmetrically into a 5-2-3-4 pattern.
A song in dhrupad style set to dhamar tala is also called a dhamar.
The text of a dhamar concerns the antics of Krishna teasing the milkmaids during the Holi Spring Festival of colours.
It is considered a relatively light and romantic musical form.
The theka or syllabic pattern of dhamar tala is :.
Clap 2 3 4 5 | Clap 2 | Wave 2 3 | Clap 2 3 4 | |.
An electronic tanpura is an electronic instrument that replicates the sound of an Indian string instrument known as the tanpura.
In Indian music, drone is a basic function of the music.
Traditionally drone is provided by one or more tanpura player, especially for vocal performances.
The range is usually one to two octaves.
For many musicians the electronic tanpura is a practical commodity.
It delivers a passable substitute for a real, live tanpura.
Certainly, it is much easier and less expensive than maintaining a live tanpura player.
The products were manufactured by the company he founded, Radel.
The first versions were created with the technology then available, using discrete components and transistors.
In the late 1990s, these gave way to models using sampled recordings of the traditional tanpura on a chip.
These copies have earned a bad name as the little white boxes and comparisons are made to the traditional acoustic tanpuras.
In Hindustani classical music, vivadi refers to pitches that are not part of the arohana or avrohana of a given raga.
In general, vivadi are not to be played during an improvisation on a given raga.
In Carnatic music.
In Carnatic music, vivadi is used in vivadi swaram, vivadi dhosha, vivadi ragam, and by extension vivadi melakarta.
Vivadi term means going against the grain of thought or approach.
It is different from Apaswaram, which is incorrect swaram or incorrect rendition / pitch / frequency deviating from the swaram itself.
A ragam is vivadi if it contains vivadi swarams, especially with the vadi swaram of the ragam.
The ragam still is a valid scale and compositions are made using such ragams too.
Examples of popular Vivadi ragas are : Nata, Varali, Vagadheeswari.
A Melakarta ragam is vivadi if it contains vivadi swarams.
40 of the 72 Melakarta ragams have vivadi swaras.
Dhosha means negative effect.
Articles that discusses vivadi ragas and a review of concerts that mentions some of vivadi ragams.
Improvisations is a 1962 LP album by Ravi Shankar.
Early life and background.
However, at an young age he showed musical inclination and at age 8 started learning pakhawaj from Pandit Ram Nath Mishra.
In the coming years, he accompanied leading musicians like, Pt.
Ravi Shankar, Ustad Ali Akbar Khan and Ustad Vilayat Khan.
Besides his musical career, he also practiced Ayurvedic medicine at his clinic in Varanasi, and taught numerous students.
He died on February 9, 2004 in Varanasi, after a brief illness, at the age of 86.
His son, Debabrata Bhattacharya is also a table player.
Debasis Chakroborty is an Indian classical slide guitar player who belongs to the Senia-Maihar Gharana.
Chakroborty was born in Calcutta, India, and was groomed in the atmosphere of music from his childhood.
He began learning guitar from his father Sh.
He then came under the tutelage of Pt.
Barun Kumar Pal, a renowned guitarist from Kolkata and Pt.
Jotin Bhattacharya, an eminent Sarod player and senior disciple of Ustad Baba Allauddin Khan Sahib of Maihar Gharana.
Later on, Debasis became a disciple of the guitar maestro Pundit Brij Bhushan Kabra.
Debasiss style of playing combines both Gayaki and Tantrakari Angs.
He is an I.C.C.R. empanelled artiste under the Ministry of external affairs, Govt.
At present, he lectures in the Department of Music, Institute of Visual Performing Arts & Research, Mangalayatan University, Aligarh.
He was a leading Hindustani vocal musician in the Kirana Gharana.
He received many awards, including the Padma Bhushan.
Later he travelled widely in search of musical knowledge to which he dedicated his entire life.
He chose to live a quiet life away from glamour and its attendant trappings.
He excelled both as performer and teacher.
Basavaraj was fond of music from a very young age.
When he was 13 years old, he lost his father.
His uncle became concerned about his future in drama.
Since then his music embraced a whole new beginning.
He mastered several Ragas and styles.
He also became adept at some other arts like wrestling, swimming and cooking.
His teacher would personally make sure that each of his students practiced for at least 12 to 15 hours a day.
In 1936 at the 600th anniversary of the Vijayanagar Empire in Hampi, Basavraj gave his first concert with his guru Gawai.
Fifteen thousand people listened silently to the young musician singing Bageshri and the vachana Nijaguna Shivayogi.
In Karachi he learnt from Ustad Latif Khan for six months.
He was not afraid to accept any challenge.
His fame had spread far and wide and continued to spread ; concert invitations came from every corner of the country.
His repertoire ranged from the pure classical, Dhrupad to Vachanas, Natyageet, Thumri, and Ghazal spanning eight languages.
He knew more than forty types of raga and he would sing them one after another right then and there.
After his concert in Delhi information minister, B.V. Keskar announced, Arre, hamare Rajguru to hukumi yekka hai !.
At another concert Begum Akhtar, declared, Rajguru yane sur ka badshah.
or Rajguru signifies the king of music.
The Government of India bestowed upon him the Padma Shri in 1975 and the Padma Bhushan in 1991.
He also received Sangeet Natak Akademi awards from central and state governments.
He was also awarded with prestigious titles by various organizations and an honorary doctorate by the Karnataka University, Dharwad.
Besides being an accomplished and talented singer, Rajaguru was patient and caring towards his students.
He would never get tired of repeating taans for his students ; he would never get angry.
He was a strict vegetarian and never even tasted tea in his life.
He had a very strict regimen of Puja, sadhna, teaching and walking.
His diet was oriented towards preserving his voice and he never ate or drank anything fried, frozen or fatty.
His dream of coming to U.S. eluded him.
His disciple, Nachiketa Sharma was beside him when he breathed his last.
Basavraj Rajguru died in July 1991, one of three illustrious Dharwad musicians to do so during this period.
Mallikarjun Mansur paying his last respects to Rajaguru declared, Even in his death he looks like a king !.
Pt Basavaraj Rajguru Memorial National Award.
The first Pt.
Basavaraj Rajguru Memorial National Award was conferred on vocalist Pt.
Ullas Kashalkar of Kolkata on 23 August 2011 during the 91st birth anniversary of Pandit Basavaraj Rajguru.
The national award carries a cash prize of Rs.
1 lakh and a citation.
On the occasion two young musicians Jayateerth Mevundi and Sangeet Katti were conferred the Pt.
Basavaraj Rajguru Memorial Yuva Puraskars which carry a cash prize of Rs.
25,000 each and a citation.
Rishab Prasanna is an Indian flute or bansuri player.
He was born in New Delhi.
He is the son of the flute and shehnai player, Pt.
Rishab Prasanna learned Indian classical music from his grandfather, Pt.
Raghunath Prasanna, his father Pt.
Rajendra Prasanna, and his uncles Sh.
Ravi Shankar Prasanna, and Sh.
Apart from his solo concert, he is also known for playing with his brother, Rajesh Prasanna.
Prasanna frequently travelled to other countries for his projects, solo concerts and workshops.
Amjad Ali Khan.
Amjad Ali Khan is an Indian classical musician who plays the Sarod.
Khan was born into a musical family and has performed internationally since the 1960s.
He was awarded Indias second highest civilian honor, the Padma Vibhushan, in 2001.
Early life and career.
His personal name was changed by a sadhu to Amjad.
Khan received homeschooling and studied music under his father.
In 1957, a cultural organization in Delhi appointed Hafiz Ali Khan as its guest and the family moved to Delhi.
He attended Modern School from 1958 to 1963.
Khan first performed in the United States in 1963 and continued into the 2000s, with his sons.
He has experimented with modifications to his instrument throughout his career.
Khan played with the Hong Kong Philharmonic Orchestra and worked as a visiting professor at the University of New Mexico.
In 2011, he performed on Carrie Newcomer s album Everything is Everywhere with his sons.
Khan has recently been awarded 21st Rajiv Gandhi National Sadbhavna Award.
20 August is celebrated as harmony day, the birth anniversary of Rajiv Gandhi.
He was awarded the Fukuoka Asian Culture Prize in 2004.
The U.S. state Massachusetts proclaimed 20 April as Amjad Ali Khan Day in 1984.
Khan was made an honorary citizen of Houston, Texas, and Nashville, Tennessee, in 1997, and of Tulsa, Oklahoma, in 2007.
He received the Banga-Vibhushan in 2011.
A Gulzar directed documentary on Amjad Ali Khan won Filmfare award in 1990.
Khan cared for his diabetic father until he died in 1972.
Subhalakshmi Barooah Khan is a native of Assam and has stopped performing.
They have two sons, Amaan, the older one, and Ayaan, who were taught music by their father.
Khan is a Muslim and his wife is a Hindu.
Their family home in Gwalior was made into a musical center and they live in New Delhi.
Tappa is a form of Indian semi-classical vocal music.
Its specialty is its rolling pace based on fast, subtle and knotty construction.
Its tunes are melodious, sweet and depict the emotional outbursts of a lover.
Tappas were sung mostly by songstresses, known as Baigees, in royal courts.
And later on by Mian Ghulam Nabi Shori or Shori Mian, a court singer of Asaf-Ud-Dowlah, Nawab of Awadh.
In Bengal, Ramnidhi Gupta composed Bengali tappas and they are called as Nidhu Babus Tappa.
Tappa gayaki took new shape and over decades became puratani, a semi-classical form of Bengali songs.
Composers of repute included Bidyasundar, Roopchaand Pakkhi, Dadathakur, Hiralal Sarkhel and many others.
A lot of celebrated artists have passed away before recordings of music became common.
Among the prominent living performers of this style are Pt.
Laxmanrao Pandit of Gwalior, Shanno Khurana, Pt.
Manvalkar of Gwalior, Girija Devi of Benaras, Dr. Ishwarchandra R. Karkare of Gwalior, Smt.
Malini Rajurkar, Shri.
Sharad Sathe, Manjiri Asnare Kelkar of Jaipur-Atrauli Gharana and Pandit Yashpaul of the Agra Gharana.
Sanam Marvi is a Pakistani folk and sufi singer.
She sings in Punjabi and Sindhi languages.
Sanam Marvi was born Hyderabad, Sindh, Pakistan in a Muslim Sindhi family.
Her fathers name is Faqeer Ghulam Rasool, a sufi singer.
She had eight siblings.
She later trained under Ustad Fateh Ali Khan of Gwalior gharana.
Sanam Marvi debuted at ` Virsa Heritage ', a programme on PTV.
She became popular after her performance at Coke Studio, a Pakistani television series featuring live music performances.
She has since appeared in two seasons of the Coke studio.
She perform sufi concerts around the world.
She made her debut in with a solo performance at 2010s Jahan-e-Khusrau, the Sufi music festival.
Sanam Marvi is married to Hamid Ali and together they have three children.
Sadhana Sargam is a well-known playback singer of Indian cinema with a career spanning over three decades.
Besides film music, she is well known for her devotional songs, Classical music, ghazals, regional film songs and pop albums.
She is a recipient of the National Film Award and Filmfare Awards South.
Sadhana has sung in many Indian languages for films, television serials, devotionals and pop music albums.
She is well known for her 1990s Hindi songs and South Indian songs.
She holds a record for being the only North Indian to have won the National Award for a South Indian song.
She is also a trained Hindustani classical singer.
Sadhana is the daughter of reputed classical singer and music teacher Neela Ghanekar.
Influenced by the musical environs of her home, Sadhana began to learn singing and classical music from the age of four.
In fact, it was Desai who recommended that she learn under Pandit Jasraj.
Sadhana was born to a family of musicians at Dabhol, the seaport town in Ratnagiri District of Maharashtra.
Her mother Neela Ghanekar, knew arranger - composer Anil Mohile, who was then arranging music for Kalyanji-Anandji.
1982 - 1990 : Early Career.
Sadhana made her playback debut in Kanku Pagli, a Gujarati film.
Her first Hindi song was the solo Door Nahin Rehna from the film Rustom.
Highly impressed, Rajesh Roshan shouldered the entire score of Khudgarz on her.
1990-2000 : Fame and Migration to South Indian films.
From the mid-1990s, Sadhana became popular in singing Tamil songs.
She is the only playback singer from India who currently sings in 27 regional languages.
Ho Gaya Na.
She won her first Star Screen award for Chupke se Lag Ja Gale from Saathiya.
She received prestigious Zee Cine Award at Dubai for Halki Halki Mulaqate Thi from Kuch Na Kaho in 2003.
She has sung more than 170 songs in Tamil alone and has many top songs.
She also sang Om Zaarare from Kuselan, along with Daler Mehndi and K. S. Chithra.
Sadhana sang several songs in Hindi and Oriya for music director Kajol-Saroj.
She has also sung the Tamil version of Mann Mohana from the Hindi film Jodhaa Akbar.
The recent Ilaiyaraaja - composed Tamil film Naan Kadavul had a song titled Amma Un Pillai featuring her voice.
Her recent Marathi album Tu Sukhkarta.
The songs were composed by Amol Bawdekar and lyrics were written by Mahesh Ghatpande.
The lyrics of these are written by Dr.Pradeep Wagh.
Dr.Waghs entire Trilogy of Anthologies is hosted on www.SitaShakti.in.
The books are available from www.bookganga.com.
This album was released at the hands of great spiritual Guru Vidyavachaspati Dr.Shankar Abhyankar.
A. R. Rahman.
Sadhana Sargam is one of the most popular playback singers in West Bengal and Aassam.
She has sung many songs in Bengali and Assamese films and albums.
She has reorded her melodious voice for more than 100 Bengali films and 87 bengali private non filmi albums.
her songs are super duper hits among bengali music fans as well as appreciated by critics.
These following albums are well appreciated by music fraternity.
1 -RSB- Anubhave Tomai Dekhi.
2 -RSB- Tomay Pabo Bole.
3 -RSB- Sujan Re.
4 -RSB- Smarniyo Sarkar.
5 -RSB- Ekechi Dujone.
6 -RSB- Swapnar Bhalo Bhasha.
7 -RSB- Gaanar Opare.
8 -RSB- Tomar Sathe Gaaner Khela.
13 -RSB- Buk Bhara Bhalo Basa.
14 -RSB- Natun Sare Ntaun Gaane.
15 -RSB- Tribute to Salil Chowdhary.
16 -RSB- Aakash Pradeep Jwale.
17 -RSB- Amar Malotilota.
19 -RSB- Swapno Dekhte Balobasi.
20 -RSB- Aami Baro Je Eka.
22 -RSB- Tumhi Elena.
24 -RSB- Mahabir Krishna.
25 -RSB- Dus Numvar Bari.
Popularity in South India.
She was first introduced to Tamil songs by acclaimed music director Vidyasagar in the film Coimbatore Mappillai.
Her duet songs with singer Hariharan proved to be most successful.
Among all the Bollywood singers, Sargam has sung the most number of songs in Tamil.
132 songs of Sargam were listed as of August 2008.
National Film Awards.
Filmfare Awards South.
Zee Cine Awards.
Maharashtra State Film Awards.
Zee Gaurav Puraskar.
Star Screen Awards.
Rasoolan Bai was a leading Indian Hindustani classical music vocal musician.
Belonging to the Benaras gharana, she specialized in the romantic Purab Ang of the Thumri musical genre and tappa.
Early life and training.
Rasoolanbai became an expert in Tappa singing as well as Purab Ang, Thumri, besides dadra, poorbi geet, hori, kajri and chaiti.
She has also taught noted classical singer Nainna Devi.
Her house of burnt during 1969 communal riots in the city.
She died on December 15, 1974, at the age of 72.
Asgari Bai was a renowned Indian Dhrupad singer.
She was a recipient of Padma Shri, Tansen Samman, Academy Samman and Shikhar Samman.
She has also been felicitated with Nari Shakti Samman.
Early life and background.
Asgari Bai was born in Bijawar, Chhatarpur.
She had come with her mother Nazeera Begum to Tikamgarh.
A royal singer.
Asgari Bai made her Guru to Zahoor Khan resident of Gohad, Bhind.
She had been in Tikamgarh Raj Darbar up to 35 years.
Asgari Bai acquired extraordinary expertise in Dhrupad to reign as the main court singer for the Orchha dynasty.
She was also invited by other royal families to treat music lovers to her spellbinding.
Asgari bai was married at the age of 35 years with Chiman Lal Gupta of Agra.
She has 5 sons and 3 daughters.
She died on Wednesday, August 9, 2006.
She was awarded the Padmashri on March 24, 1990.
Mohammad Sabir Baburaj, also known as M. S. Baburaj, was a Malayalam music composer.
He is often credited for the renaissance of Malayalam film music.
Baburaj has rendered music to many evergreen Malayalam film songs.
Baburaj was born on 29 March 1921 in Kozhikode, then known as Calicut.
His early childhood was spent in destitution and poverty.
Baburaj thus became a fatherless, often singing songs in trains to make a living.
One of his greatest achievements was the introduction of Hindustani strains into Malayalam popular music.
He successfully composed melodies based on Hindustani Ragas and blended Malayalam lyrics into them.
Most of the lyrics were written by eminent Malayalam poets like P. Bhaskaran and Vayalar.
In search of pure music, young Baburaj visited West Bengal, Mumbai and Sri Lanka.
He learned Harmonium in these period.
He came back to Kerala to a miserable life.
In 1957, he composed music for the Malayalam film  Minnaminungu , by Ramu Kariat, thus entered the Malayalam film industry.
Baburaj was also an accomplished singer and harmonium player.
Baburaj died an early death, on 7 October 1978 at the age of 57.
He was survived by his wife and children.
The Baburaj - P. Bhaskaran - Yesudas combination produced many of the most memorable tunes of the 60s and 70s.
Most of his classic duets were sung by K. J. Yesudas & S. Janaki, each recording solo Baburaj compositions as well.
The Baburaj - S. Janaki partnership is sometimes compared to that of Madan Mohan and Lata Mangeshkar combination of Hindi Music.
The Manorama Music company, chanced upon an old audio cassette of Baburaj rendering some of his own compositions.
The cassette was re-mixed and became an instant hit.
The tracks gave Kerala a rejuvenated taste of Baburajs music.
Though a successful composer, Baburaj was never a careerist.
` Thrikkakkare theerthakkare ' in the 1978 film ` Yagaswam ' directed by Hariharan was his last recorded song.
The following is an incomplete list of movies that Baburaj had composed songs for.
All the films are in Malayalam.
Bickram Ghosh is an Indian tabla player who performs Hindustani classical music and fusion music.
His music is strongly influenced by thumri and khayal genres of the Patiala gharana.
Bickram was born in Kolkata, West Bengal to the tabla maestro Pandit Shankar Ghosh and classical vocalist, Sanjukta Ghosh.
He started learning tabla from his father Pandit Shankar Ghosh, who had played with Ustad Ali Akbar Khan.
Bickram Ghosh has performed with well-known performers including Ustad Ali Akbar Khan and Pandit Ravi Shankar.
He also performed in jugalbandis with his father in some concerts.
Bickram worked with George Harrison just before the ex-Beatle 's death.
Bickram performs in various avatars.
His long-standing band, Rhythmscape, which performs neo-fusion music, celebrated their 10th anniversary in 2011.
To celebrate the occasion Rhythmscape collaborated with Greg Ellis to perform in Kolkata and Mumbai, an event organized by Folktronic.
Bickram performs within Troikala with Assamese folk/indie singer Papon and Scottish singer-songwriter Rachel Sermanni.
Troikala was curated and organized by British Council in association with Folktronic.
Bickram collaborated with Sonu Nigam to compose the music for the film Jal.
Bickram has also scored music for many movies including the Mira Nair production, Little Zizou.
Bickram launched his music company, Melting Pot Productions, in October 2010.
He appeared in an episode of MTV Roots.
Bickram Ghosh taught a percussion course entitled Repercussion for Ace Open University via online streaming.
He married Jaya Seal in 2004.
Manju Mehta is an Indian classical sitar player.
Manju Mehta was born in well-known Bhatt family of Jaipur.
She had her initial training in sitar from her elder brother Pandit Shashimohan Bhatt.
Her younger brother is the world renown Pandit Vishwa Mohan Bhatt.
She learned classical music under Damodarlal Kabra and Pandit Ravi Shankar.
Manju Mehta is a top Grade artist on All India Radio.
She is the co-founder of Saptak school of music @ Saptak trust Saptak Festival of Music held every year in Ahmedabad.
Debashish Bhattacharya is an Indian classical musician who plays the lap slide guitar.
Bhattacharya was born into a musical family in Kolkata, it became apparent that Bhattacharya was skilled at a young age.
He made his debut at the age of four on All India Radio, in Calcutta.
At age twenty, he was awarded the President of India Award for winning the National Music competition of All India Radio.
His originality as a musician has earned him global admiration, and he has performed on networks all over the world.
He has attracted attention to the slide guitar and Indian classical music within India and globally.
He invented his own slide-guitars, unique to his compositions, which he calls the Trinity of Guitars.
These hollow neck instruments are the 24-string chaturangui, the 14 string gandharvi and the anandi, a 4-string lap steel ukulele.
The school is a non-profit organisation, works for restoring music, musician and traditional art.
His most popular albums are : Mahima with Bob Brozman, and Calcutta Slide-Guitar, Vol.
Both of these albums are on Riverboat records and ranked in the top 10 of the Billboard World Music Charts.
Vilayat Hussein Khan.
Vilayat Hussain Khan was one of the prominent figures of Agra Gharana, who was known both as singer and teacher.
His father, Natthan Khan, was himself a well known singer, and a noted guru.
Vilayat Hussain Khans elder brothers were also noted singers and taught him after their fathers early death.
Abdullah Khan was Natthan Khans son who was several years senior to his brother Vilayat.
Vilayat Hussain Khan, the singer, is not to be confused with the famous and controversial sitar player Vilayat Khan.
His most famous guru-shishya relationship was with Jagannathbuwa Purohit and each of them composed several bandishes dedicated to the other.
Vilayat Khans singing from his later years is available through commercial releases and private collectors.
Vilayat Hussain Khan composed bandishes in many ragas including some very rare ones under the nome de plume Pran Piya.
After his fathers death, he was trained by his uncles Kallan Khan and Mohammad Baksh.
His most famous guru-shishya relationship was with Jagannathbuwa Purohit and each of them composed several bandishes dedicated to each other.
His son Yunus Hussain Khan is a prominent name in Agra Gharana as well.
In London is a studio album by Hindustani classical musician Ravi Shankar.
It was published on LP record in 1964, originally with the title Indias Master Musician / Recorded in London.
Angel Records published the remastered album on 26 January 1999 under the shortened title In London.
ITC Sangeet Research Academy.
ITC Sangeet Research Academy is a Hindustani classical music academy run by the corporate house, ITC Ltd.
It is located in Kolkata, India.
Noted musicians associated with the academy include Ulhas Kashalkar.
Satyajit Ray, legendary filmmaker, was one of the trustees.
ITC Sangeet Research Academy was established in 1978 with the objective of preserving and promoting Hindustani Classical Music.
Vijay Kichlu, of the celebrated vocal duo Kichlu Brothers, was the Founding Director.
The academy has housed several great musicians and gurus of India ever since its inception.
The academy carries out research in Hindustani classical music in order to restore some of the undocumented works by the maestros.
The academy organises a classical music festival called as ITC SRA Sangeet Sammelan every year in all major cities in India.
These Sammelans showcase the best of their talent and also present the greatest musicians of the country.
They also organise the ITC SRA Mini Sangeet Sammelan in smaller cities.
In Concert 1972.
The album features three ragas, including Raga Sindhi Bhairavi, which Ali Akbar Khan had previously interpreted on his landmark recording.
Music critic Ken Hunt writes of the tigerish potential for male and female dialogue in their jugalbandi combination.
Lavezzoli writes of Shankars longstanding association with his tabla player that Rakha was the ideal partner, given the drummers broad training.
The final selection was a morning raga, Sindhi Bhairavi.
Harrisons co-producers were Rakhas son Zakir Hussain, and sound engineer Phil McDonald.
Apple Records issued In Concert 1972 in January 1973 in the United States, and three months later in Britain.
Despite such an output of product, the label was being wound down from this point on.
The 2004 two-CD version reunited the two halves of Raga Manj Khamaj.
Their sarod-sitar brotherhood had begun under their guru during the 1940s.
Few Hindustani reissues - or new releases - will match its white-hot heat of creativity this year.
All selections by Ravi Shankar and Ali Akbar Khan.
A Meeting by the River.
The album is included in Tom Moons 2008 book 1,000 Recordings to Hear Before You Die.
Cooder and Bhatt met for the first time less than one hour before recording began and improvised much of the set.
Author George Plasketes described Bhatts playing as highly nuanced while Cooder performs in a more loose-jointed, slip n slide style.
According to Gioffre, Cooder and Bhatt use improvisation and voice-like phrasing, showing melodic performances in an alternating fashion and in unison.
Longing has a structure similar to a raga.
In 2011, Bhatt performed A Meeting by the River at a music festival in honor of guru Kelucharan Mohapatra.
Bhatt said of the song : Music has no religion and no geographical or linguistic barrier.
It speaks a universal language.
My composition - A Meeting by the River - aims at explaining this.
Bhatt has stated that he considers working with Cooder his most special collaboration.
Gioffre wrote a positive review for the album and called Cooder and Bhatt genuine masters of their respective instruments.
Furthermore, Gioffre wrote : this album is masterfully recorded ; each instrument is clear, distinct, and three-dimensional sounding.
Margasak wrote that the fusion revealed a rare, often transcendental beauty as the two artists gently and intuitively found common ground.
Rolling Stone called the album fruitful and awarded it three out of five stars.
Chart performance and recognition.
A Meeting by the River reached a peak position of number four on Billboard Top World Music Albums chart.
In 1994, the album earned Cooder and Bhatt Grammy Awards for Best World Music Album.
The album is included in Tom Moons 2008 book 1,000 Recordings to Hear Before You Die : A Listeners Life List.
All tracks by Ry Cooder and Vishwa Mohan Bhatt unless noted otherwise.
Track listing adapted from Allmusic.
Credits adapted from Allmusic.
Kajari, derived from the Hindi word Kajra, or Kohl, is a genre of semi-classical singing, popular in Uttar Pradesh and Bihar.
Some noted exponents of Kajari are Pandit Channulal Mishra, Shobha Gurtu, Siddheshwari Devi, Girija Devi, and Rajan and Sajan Mishra.
Keherwa or Kaharva is one of the famous talas of Hindustani music.
It is also one of the common taals in North India, used in various popular compositions of Indian music.
Keherwa has many variations including dhumaali, bhajani, and qawwali.
Keherwa is a 8-beat pattern used in ragas.
It has eight beats in two equal divisions.
The period between every two beats is equal.
The first beat out of 8 beats is called sam and the fifth beat out of 8 beats is called khali.
Sam is the Ist Division.
Khali is the IInd Division.
To exhibit the Keherwa, the audience claps on the first beat and then shows that fifth beat is waived.
Cyclical series of equally periodical beats consisted of recurring claps and waves :.
clap, 2, 3, 4, waive, 2, 3, 4,.
clap, 2, 3, 4, waive, 6, 7, 8,.
It has a characteristic pattern of bols.
In popular culture.
He is considered to have been a major influence on the Red Hot Chili Peppers early sound.
Born in Haifa, Israel, Slovak immigrated with his family to the United States when he was five years old.
Slovak met future band mates Anthony Kiedis, Flea, and Jack Irons while attending school in Los Angeles.
However, Slovak quit the band to focus on What is This ?.
, which had gotten a record deal, leaving the Red Hot Chili Peppers to record their debut album without him.
During his career, Slovak developed a serious heroin addiction.
He was replaced by guitarist John Frusciante, who was greatly influenced by Slovaks playing style.
Several Red Hot Chili Peppers songs have been written as tributes to Slovak, including Knock Me Down and My Lovely Man.
Hillel Slovak was born in Haifa, Israel, to Jewish parents who were survivors of the Holocaust.
His mother was of Polish descent and his father of Croatian descent.
The family emigrated to the U.S. when Slovak was five years old.
They settled in the Queens borough of New York City, then in 1967 relocated to Southern California.
As a child, Slovak developed an interest in art, and would often spend time painting with his mother, Esther.
He attended Laurel Elementary School in West Hollywood and Bancroft Jr.
High School in Hollywood, where he met future bandmates Jack Irons and Michael Flea Balzary.
During this time, he was highly influenced by hard rock music such as Jimi Hendrix, Led Zeppelin, and Kiss.
They called their band Chain Reaction, then changed the name to What is This ?.
after their first gig.
After one of the groups shows, Slovak met audience member Anthony Kiedis, and invited him to his house for a snack.
Slovak, Kiedis and Flea became best friends and often used LSD, heroin, cocaine and methamphetamine recreationally.
Anthyms original bassist was deemed unsatisfactory, so Slovak began teaching Flea to play bass.
Following several months of commitment to the instrument, Flea developed proficiency and a strong musical chemistry with Slovak.
When Strassman saw Flea playing Anthym songs on his equipment he quit the band, with Flea quickly replacing him.
Shortly afterwards Anthym entered a local Battle of the Bands contest and won second place.
Anthym started to play at local nightclubs, despite the fact that the members were all underage.
After graduating from high school, the band changed their name to What Is This ?.
Flea left Anthym around this time to accept an offer of playing bass in the prominent L.A. punk band Fear.
What Is This ?.
continued on and performed many shows along the California coast.
The Red Hot Chili Peppers.
Slovak, Kiedis, and Flea began to create their own music after finding inspiration in a punk-funk fusion band called Defunkt.
The three formed a band with former Anthym-drummer Jack Irons called Tony Flow and the Miraculously Majestic Masters of Mayhem.
The band had only one song, entitled Out in L.A., and was formed for the purpose of playing the song once.
After the band started to gain popularity amongst the L.A. club scene, Kiedis began writing more lyrics.
The threesome traveled to New York City to perform more shows and to spread Chili Pepperdom.
Shortly after the trip, Slovak moved out of the groups shared house to live with his girlfriend.
The Red Hot Chili Peppers entered Bijou Studios to record a demo tape and subsequently secured a record deal with EMI.
Flea left Fear to pursue the Red Hot Chili Peppers.
At the same time, What is This ?.
had also gotten a record deal.
Flea ultimately respected the decision, but felt the band would suffer musically without them.
He and Kiedis hired drummer Cliff Martinez and guitarist Jack Sherman to fill Irons and Slovaks places, respectively.
During the recording of the second What is This ?.
album, Slovak became frustrated with the band and contacted Flea about rejoining the Red Hot Chili Peppers.
This came at an opportune time, as the group was dissatisfied with Slovaks replacement, Jack Sherman.
Kiedis felt that Shermans guitar work didnt have the same spirit that Slovak contributed to the bands sound.
After the culmination of the promotional tour for their first album, Sherman was fired and Slovak rejoined the band.
Slovak returned to the Chili Peppers for their second album, Freaky Styley, which was released on August 16, 1985.
What is This ?.
had finally disbanded, and Irons returned to the Chili Peppers in mid 1986 after Martinez was fired.
Flea, Slovak and Kiedis especially were involved in heavy drug use and their relationships became strained.
Flea recalled that it began to seem ugly to me and not fun ; our communication was not healthy.
Kiedis became dependent on heroin, leaving the rest of the group to work on much of the albums material by themselves.
Slovak felt a deep connection to the album ; he reflected in his diary It was so fun.
Im so extremely proud of everybodys work - it is at times genius.
Slovak was the subject of the songs Skinny Sweaty Man, Me and My Friends, & No Chump Love Sucker.
On The Uplift Mofo Party Plan, Slovak experimented with different musical styles, playing the sitar on the song Behind the Sun.
During the tour in support of Freaky Styley, Slovaks health began to deteriorate.
Slovak and Flea would wrestle regularly on tour, but Slovak became too weak to participate.
It was a sad moment.
An entry from Slovaks diary on January 21, 1988 discusses his attempts to begin a new drug-free phase of life.
During the tour both experienced intense heroin withdrawal, with Slovak much more unstable than Kiedis.
Slovak was found dead by police in his Hollywood apartment on June 27, 1988.
After his autopsy, authorities determined that he had died two days earlier due to a heroin overdose.
He is interred at Mount Sinai Memorial Park Cemetery in Hollywood Hills, California.
Following Slovaks death Kiedis fled town and did not attend the funeral, considering the situation to be surreal and dreamlike.
Although he found the death to be a shock, he initially was not scared straight and continued to use heroin.
Irons has suffered from severe depression since Slovaks death.
Kiedis and Flea decided to continue making music, hoping to continue what Slovak helped build.
Musical style and legacy.
Slovak was primarily influenced by hard rock artists such as Jimi Hendrix, Santana, and Led Zeppelin.
His playing method was highly based on improvisation, a style commonly used in funk music.
Kiedis observed that his playing evolved during his time away from the group in What is This ?.
, with Slovak adopting a more fluid style featuring sultry elements as opposed to his original hard rock techniques.
On Uplift, Slovak experimented with genres outside of traditional funk music including reggae and speed metal.
Kiedis describes the song as pure Hillel inspiration.
Slovak helped to incorporate new sounds in the groups work, including adding occasional drum machines.
Slovaks work was one of the major contributing factors to the Red Hot Chili Peppers early sound.
He was also a huge influence on a young John Frusciante, who would later replace him as guitarist in the band.
Just like Slovak before him, Frusciante developed a heroin addiction.
Unlike Slovak, Frusciante eventually managed to break and defeat the habit.
The songs Knock Me Down and My Lovely Man were written as tributes to Slovak.
In 1999, a book titled Behind the Sun : The Diary and Art of Hillel Slovak was published.
It 's a powerful thing.
With Addie Brik.
With What Is This.
With Red Hot Chili Peppers.
Shrikrishna Narayan Ratanjankar.
Shrikrishna Narayan Ratanjankar or S N Ratanjankar was a distinguished scholar and teacher of Hindustani classical music, from the Agra gharana.
His father Narayan Govind Ratanjankar was born in Mumbai.
Shrikrishnas grand father, Govindrao came to Mumbai in the middle of 19th century.
After graduation Shrikrishnas father, Narayanrao became a police officer in the then British regime.
At the age of 7, S.N.Ratanjankar was trained under the guidance of Krishnam Bhatt of Karwar.
He also received instruction from Anant Manohar Joshi and later under Faiyaz Khan of Agra gharana.
In 1911, he started training with musicologist Vishnu Narayan Bhatkhande and is today his most well known disciple.
He graduated from Bombay University in 1926.
In the year 1925, Ratanjankar graduated from the Wilson College, Mumbai.
Later he was once again called to head the Bhatkhande Sangeet Vidyapeeth on a 2 years contract.
As a vocalist he sang Dhrupad and Khayal styles of Agra gharana.
Rakesh Chaurasia is an Indian composer and flautist, who plays the Indian bamboo flute.
He is the nephew and child prodigy of flautist Hariprasad Chaurasia.
He is one of his uncles most accomplished disciples.
These are major albums released by Rakesh Chaurasia, categorized by release dates.
She also imbibed the Light-Classical forms of Thumri and Dadra under the guidance of Shri Baburao Joshi.
Dr. Bharati completed her M.A. from SNDT Womens University, Mumbai in 1982.
She has been honoured with the Sangeet Pravin by Gandharva Mahavidyalaya in 1985.
As a vocalist of the Jaipur-Atrauli gharana, she has performed in numerous concerts and festivals in various cities.
She has visited many universities as expert for specialised lecture-demonstrations and refresher courses.
She has been awarded the title of Gaan Hira by SNDT Womens University, Mumbai.
The learning phase.
Dr. Bharati started her journey into the world of Hindustani Classical Music at the age of 12.
Under the able guidance of Shri Chintubua Mhaiskar of Sangli she evolved into a promising performer.
She was awarded the National Scholarship for Higher Education in Music by the Government of India in the year 1976.
This was a very important phase in her evolution as a classical performer.
This rigorous training resulted in an opportunity to perform on the AIR Tuesday Night Concert.
This turned out to be a turning point in the life of Dr. Bharati.
Her performance on AIR was heard by the maestro of the Jaipur-Atrauli gharana, Pandit Nivruttibua Sarnaik.
Thereafter, whenever Panditji was in Kolhapur he would teach her the gems of Jaipur gayaki in his own style.
The blessings of her Gurus and her devotion to music led to her becoming a capable and confident performer.
Dr. Bharati Vaishampayan has performed in over 500 live concerts all over India.
Some of the prestigious concerts are :.
Dr. Bharati Vaishampayan has also participated in various special programmes and lecture-demonstrations.
Chief among them are :.
Dr. Bharati Vaishampayan first performed on All India Radio in the year 1972.
She has been honoured with the status of A Grade artist for Classical as well as Light-Classical categories.
Some of the prestigious AIR broadcasts are :.
She has also participated in various discussions on AIR, notably Future of Classical Music and Swarlipi of Pandit Bhatkhande.
She has also given Classical performances on the Music Asia channel in the programme titled Alaap.
Currently this programme is being telecast on the Z Marathi channel.
Two CDs of various live performances of Dr. Bharati have been released by Musicians Guild.
These CDs feature Raagas like Shuddha Kalyan, Yaman, Shankara, Khambavati, Kaushi Kanada, Adana Bahaar and Malvi.
Dr. Bharati has been actively involved in the Marathi tradition of Sangeet Naatak.
Her major contribution in this field, is the direction for Marathi Sangeet Naataks, Sangeet Sharda, Sangeet Maanapmaan and Sangeet Swayamvar.
Sangeet Swayamvar won the 1st prize for Best Naatak along with a total of 33 awards at Bruhanmaharashtra Shaikshanik Sanstha, Delhi.
Dr. Bharati Vaishampayan is the recipient of many awards and recognitions.
Chief among these are :.
As a Guru.
Dr. Bharati has successfully worked for the spread of Indian music on various fronts.
Dr. Bharati is an able guide for Ph.D. students.
So far 7 students have completed their Doctorate in Music under her guidance.
Dr. Bharati has been involved in the nurture of the Music department of Shivaji University, Kolhapur, since its inception in 1984.
She became the Head of the Music department in 1987.
Hundreds of students of this prestigious institution are now successfully pursuing their career in music.
The tradition of music is being continued by Dr. Bharatis next generation under her guidance.
R. K. Bijapure.
R. K. Bijapure, born January 7, 1917 is an Indian harmonium player in the Hindustani classical tradition.
Bijapure was born in 1917 at Kagwad.
His father Shri.
Kallopant Bijapure was a dramatist and composer.
Bijapures first Guru was Shri.
He took further training in harmonium from Pt.
Rajwade, Shri.Govindrao Gaikwad and Pt.
He also learned vocal music from stalwarts like Pt.
Ramkrishnabua Vaze, Pt.
Shivrambua Vaze, Pt.
Kagalkarbua, and Pt.
Sangeet Visharad and Sangeet Alankar from Akhil Bharatiya Gandharva Mahavidyalaya.
Pt.Bijapure has his own unique style of Harmonium Solo.
During the Festival of Russia in India, a Russian delegation was mesmerized after listening to Panditji 's solo.
They specially recorded on the video his swift finger movements on harmonium keyboard.
As an accompanist he has accompanied four generations of vocalists right from Pt.Ramkrishnabua Vaze, Pt.Shivrambua Vaze, Pt.Kagalkarbua, Pt.
Sawai Gandharva, Pt.D.V.Paluskar, Pt.Utturkarbua, Ustad Amir Khan, Ustad Bade Gulam Ali Khan, Dr.Gangubai.
Bhimsen Joshi, Pt.
Basavraj Rajguru, Pt.
Mallikarjun Mansoor, Pt.
Kumar Gandharva, Vidushi Manik Verma, Dr. Prabha Atre, Vidushi Kishori Amonkar, Vidushi Malini Rajurkar, and many other stalwarts.
He has his unique style of accompaniment.
While complementing the main artistes he uses the pauses available in between to add charm to the concert.
Building a continuous rapport with the audience is another feature of his presentation.
As Music Guru :.
He started  Shri Ram Sangeet Mahavidyalaya  in 1938.
Over 10,000 students have gained under his tutelage.
Some of his well known disciples include Dr.Sudhanshu Kulkarni Shri.
Ravindra Mane, Dr. Ravindra Katoti, Smt.
Kunda Welling, Shri.
Shridhar Kulkarni, Mala Adhyapak, Aparna Chitnis, Madhuli Bhave, Deepak Marathe, Mahesh Telang.
Last days and death.
Bijapure died on 19 November 2010 due to age related health issues.
However he was still actively teaching his disciples until his last few days.
Imrat Khan is a leading sitar and surbahar player.
He is the younger brother of sitar maestro Ustad Vilayat Khan.
Training and early career.
In 1952 Vilayat and Imrat moved in together in Calcutta.
They performed together for many years.
From the 1960s onwards, Imrat has performed and recorded solo, playing both sitar and surbahar.
Solo career and legacy.
For decades, Imrat has recorded extensively on both his instruments.
He has toured in Europe, the Americas, and East and Southeast Asia.
Surbahar players are rare today, and Imrat is the main living exponent.
The surbahar tradition is largely upheld by Irshad, who has made some very traditional solo recordings.
She was also awarded the Kalidas Samman by the Government of Madhya Pradesh in 2001-2002.
Early life and training.
She was also a student of Bhatkhande Music Institute at Lucknow under S. N. Ratanjankar.
During her tenure, she supervised numerous research programs in the field of music, as well published several books on the subject.
Her love before music had been English literature, and later she had acquired a formidable command over Sanskrit language and literature.
Zamzama is an Arabic word meaning Thunder, or Roar.
As with many Arabic and Persian words, it has been taken into Urdu and is now considered indegenous to that language.
The meaning is : addition of notes.
The difference to a khatka is, that the notes in a Zamzama are rendered in progressive combinations and permutations.
For the listener it sounds like a complex taan pattern with sharp gamaks.
Zamzamas are an integral part of tappa singing and best applied herefore.
In Khayal renditions - a vocal style of North Indian Classics it must be applied with great caution by the vocalist.
Sawai Gandharva Bhimsen Festival.
The Sawai Gandharva Bhimsen Mahotsav is an annual Indian Classical music festival held in Pune since 1953.
Bhimsen Joshi as a memorial music conference commemorating the life and work of Pt.
Joshis guru, Pt.
Sawai Gandharva alias Rambhau Kundgolkar, the festivals namesake.
Joshi was leading the organization of the festival, performing artists received personal invitations from Pt.
Joshi to perform at the festival.
A younger artists debut performance at the festival connotes their arrival and promise to the Classical music scene of India.
The festival was started in 1953 on a small scale, to commemorate the first death anniversary of Pt.
Sawai Gandharva, the acclaimed Hindustani Classical vocalist of the Kirana Gharana.
The festival played a key role in the development of Hindustani Classical music in Indias post-independence cultural history.
After independence, the political division between India and Pakistan culturally alienated many Hindustani musicians.
The newfound Indian Republic resulted in an end to the patronage of musicians.
Classical musicians were forced to find new methods of sustaining themselves and their art.
Arya Sangeet Prasarak Mandal.
Change in leadership.
Bhimsen Joshi was leading the organization of the festival since its beginning until 2002 when his health problems became of concern.
Joshis youngest son, Shrinivas Joshi, and senior disciple, Shrikant Deshpande, succeeded Pt.
Joshi in organizing the music conference.
Since Bhimsen Joshi s death in 2011, Shrinivas Joshi and Anand Deshmukh have been leading organizers of the music conference.
The festival was initiated specifically to showcase performers of the Kirana Gharana and started on a small scale.
Gharana-specific music festivals were popular at the time because musicians wanted to commercialize their Gharana style and artists.
Influence of 2009 H1N1 flu pandemic.
The 2009 Festival was postponed to January 2010 due to an H1N1 scare in Pune.
This was the first instance in festival history of any kind of postponement.
Recently, many festival regulars have criticized the festivals growing commercial success for causing a decrease in musical quality.
Many attribute this to Pt.
Bhimsen Joshis retirement from organizing the festival after 2002.
At the 59th festival in 2011, the performances of senior musicians like Utd.
Amjad Ali Khan and Dr. Prabha Atre were interrupted due to time restrictions, angering audiences.
Many have also criticized the ASPM for inviting fewer musicians of less popularity to perform.
The ASPM has also been criticized for not publicly releasing vintage recordings of past festival performances.
The Sawai Gandharva Music Festival is conducted every year in the first two weeks of December over three days.
In the past, the festival runs through whole the night and the days used to end in the morning.
Traditionally, each festival is inaugurated with a tribute honoring Pt.
Sawai Gandharva, with a Shehnai musician performing first, in the early morning.
It has been tradition that the last, finale performance is presented by Pt.
Joshis retirement in 2004, other members of the Kirana Gharana have concluded the festival, including Pt.
Sangmeshwar Gurav in 2005, leading disciples of Pt.
Bhimsen Joshi in 2006.
Doyen of Kirana Gharana, eminent vocalist Dr. Prabha Atre has concluded every festival since 2007.
Abdul Karim Khan.
List of festivals and performances.
The Arya Sangeet Prasarak Mandal takes the task of recording details of the festival each year.
The festival has been recorded in picture, video and audio, some of which is commercially available.
Festivals are listed counter-chronologically.
List of performing artists.
The following musicians have performed at the Sawai Gandharva festival.
The featured musicians have included :.
Ustad Wahid Khan was an Indian surbahar and sitar player.
He was the son of Ustad Imdad Khan and belonged to the Imdadkhani gharana or Etawah Gharana of classical music.
His brother Ustad Enayat Khan was also a sitar and a surbahar player.
Ustad Wahid Khan and Ustad Enayat Khan were both trained by their father in sitar and surbahar.
Ustad Wahid Khan specialised in the surbahar while his brother Ustad Enayat Khan specialised in sitar.
Ustad Wahid Khan was born in Etawah, Uttar Pradesh to the sitar maestro Ustad Imdad Khan.
He was still quite young when Imdad Khan moved to Kolkata from Etawah with his family.
His available disc recordings of Khamaj and Piloo both on the Sitar offer a glimpse of his virtuosity on the instrument.
Imdad Khan, later, moved out of Kolkata to settle in Indore as the Court-musician of the Maharaja Holkar of Indore.
His sons Enayat Khan and Wahid Khan accompanied him to Indore.
Wahid Khan also served the Patiala Darbar for 3 years as its Court-musician.
He was also the Court-musician of the Nizam of Hyderabad.
Wahid Khan was a regular performer at the All India Radio.
His grandson is the famous Ustad Shahid Parvez.
A Morning Raga / An Evening Raga.
A Morning Raga / An Evening Raga is an LP by Hindustani classical musician Ravi Shankar.
It was released in 1968 on vinyl.
It was later digitally remastered and released in CD format through Angel Records.
Bharatiya Sangeet Vadya.
Bharatiya Sangeet Vadya is a book written by Dr. Lalmani Misra.
It was published under the Lokodya Granthmala series of Bharatiya Jnanpith, New Delhi.
The first edition was published in 1973, the second in 2002.
The book was written in Hindi.
The book is currently under translation ; an English version may soon be available.
The book has fourteen chapters :.
The Mohan Veena is a stringed musical instrument used in Indian classical music.
It derives its name from its inventor, the Grammy Award winning Pandit Vishwa Mohan Bhatt who resides in Jaipur India.
The instrument is actually a modified Archtop guitar and consists of 20 strings viz.
A gourd is screwed into the back of the neck for improved sound quality and vibration.
It is held in the lap like a slide guitar.
The Mohan Veena is under tremendous tension ; the total strings pull to be in excess of 500 pounds.
Amar Bhoopali is a 1951 Indian film, produced and directed by V. Shantaram, written by Vishram Bedekar.
It is an ode to the saffron flag of Marathas, calling on people to rise again against the foreign enemy.
It was nominated in the category of Grand Prize of the Festival in 1952 Cannes Film Festival.
The music for the film was composed by Vasant Desai and lyrics penned by Shahir Honaji Bala.
The soundtrack consists of 8 songs, featuring vocals by Panditrao Nagarkar, Lata Mangeshkar and Asha Bhosle.
Krishna Mohan Bhatt is a sitar player, teacher and scholar from Jaipur, India.
He comes from a family of musicians in Jaipur.
They were Sanskrit scholars, poets, and musicians.
Ravi Shankar, and musicians Pt.
Nikhil Banerjee and Ustad Ali Akbar Khan, who had a strong impact on Krishnas musical growth.
Krishna 's repertoire in performance includes a wide variety of rare and old traditional compositions from these masters of music.
Krishna Bhatt has received numerous awards and honors including the Sangeet Kalaratna in 2009.
He divides his time between Jaipur, Rajasthan and New York City, where he continues to perform and teach.
Kumar Bose is an Indian tabla maestro and composer of Indian classical music.
Bose belongs to the Benaras Gharana style of tabla playing.
In addition to his musical abilities, Bose is also an awarded sportsman, a carrom champion, and fluently speaks four languages.
He received the Sangeet Natak Akademi Award in 2007.
Bose was born in Kolkata in a musical family.
His father was Biswanath Bose, a distinguished tabla player who taught his son to play his first beat of rhythm.
His brothers are also noted musicians, who keep a traditional, thorough and vigorous training regime.
Boses first teacher was his father.
After his father 's untimely death, he was taught by Kishan Maharaj, a highly respected musician.
Bose has been applauded for evolving a distinctive style of his own without diluting the purity of tradition.
However, it is the unusual way that he plays the bnaya that has brought him attention.
He plays the bass drum-like instrument with his right hand, although he plays the tabla with his left.
Though he is right-handed, he picked up this practice by sitting across from and mirroring his father from early childhood.
Bose gave his first public performance at the age of 4.
By 14, he performed abroad and has played at almost every major music hall in the world since.
Over the past 40 years, he has also performed and recorded in duets with his guru.
From the Benaras Gharana, he has played with Girija Devi, Rajan and Sajan Mishra, Kanthe Maharaj, and Kishan Maharaj.
Boses collaborations have given an international reputation as a great musician.
Bose currently conducts private lessons in the style of his mentors.
He conducts classes daily with students from age 3 to 35 at his home in North Calcutta.
He is known for maintaining high standards for his students, emphasizing the importance devoted practice and other aspects of the tradition.
His high profile students also includes the likes of the Mumbai-based tabla player Shyama Prasad Das.
Bose has produced or performed on over 200 recordings in several genres, while staying true to his classical Indian lineage.
The first live international recording of his solo Virtuosity was released through the Darbar Festival 2006 in London.
The Times reviewed the performance, declaring him the best tabla player in the world today.
Kumar Bose is married to Kaberi Bose, a classical singer and they have a daughter Trisha Bose, a vocalist.
CDs released are.
Equalize is an Urban Desi album by the UK band Swami released on September 24, 2007.
Their two previous albums were DesiRock in 2004, and So Who Am I in 2005.
On June 15, a live version of the song was premiered instead, recorded at the 2007 Wychwood Festival.
Hey Hey premiered on MySpace on August 1, 2007, and the album artwork was revealed at the same time.
Limited Edition release.
B-Sides, remixes and alternate versions.
Tracks # 1-7 all appeared on the EMI India release of Equalize.
On August 29, 2007, a preview of a live video for Electro Jugni was uploaded to the video-sharing site YouTube.
In May 2008, it was revealed that a full music video for Electro Jugni had been filmed.
A preview of the video surfaced on YouTube around the same time but was later removed.
Shafaatullah Khan is a tabla, sitar and surbahar player.
He is the fourth son of Imrat Khan.
Altaf Hussain Tafo Khan is a master tabla player.
Tafo Khan was formed in the Punjab gharana.
His teachers were Mian Qadir Bukhsh and Haji Fida Hussain.
He is recognised for his matchless tayyari and his solo performances are characterised by his prowess over difficult bols.
Tafo has performed near lots of great legends including Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan.
Natya Sangeet is a form of Indian classical and semi-classical music.
The name literally means Dramatic Music and the musical dramas are then called as Sangeet Natak.
It is also one of the two popular forms of vocal arts in Maharashtra and surrounding states.
The other one is Bhavageet.
In 1879, Playwriter and producer Trilokekar independently presented his musical play Nal-Damayanti to Marathi public.
It was the first musical play on Marathi stage.
Annasaheb Kirloskar wrote shakuntal in 1880, thereby starting a new tradition of sangita natak in Maharashtra.
During its early period, Sangeet natak was dominated by religious plays like Sangeet Saubhdra, which is legend in Marathi sangeet natak.
Mogubai Kurdikar was a renowned Hindustani classical music vocalist of the Jaipur-Atrauli gharana.
Early years and background.
Mogu Kurdikar was born in a Gomantak Maratha Samaj community in the village of Kurdi in the then Portuguese Goa.
While Mogu was with Chandreshwar Bhootnath Mandali, her mother died.
The theater company soon went bankrupt, and the rival Satarkar Stree Sangeet Mandali hired Mogu.
Mogu moved to Sangli, and took some music lessons from Inayat Khan of the Rampur-Sahaswan gharana.
For some reason, however, he too soon decided to terminate giving her further lessons.
Alladiya Khan and the power struggle in Bombay.
One day he stopped, introduced himself and offered to teach her.
After some eighteen months, Alladiya Khan moved to Bombay, and Mogu followed.
Thus begun a time of intrigue in Bombays high-society and classical music circles.
This came to happen, and Alladiya heard of it.
He demanded that she stop the discipleship and instead go to his brother, Hyder Khan.
At this stage in her career, Mogu could likely have supported herself as a performer.
But she chose not to.
She gave birth to a daughter, Kishori, and kept practicing on her own, until one day Alladiya came back to her.
They performed the gandha-bandan, and he now kept teaching her to the end of his life.
She became one of the topmost singers in North India, even hailed as the queen by Alladiya in public.
Gopalkrishna Bhobe : Kalaatm Gomantak.
This was at a time when it was difficult for classical musicians, in however high esteem, to support themselves.
Arup Chattopadhyay is an Indian tabla player.
He was born at Chandannagar, West Bengal.
He started learning tabla at the age of six from his father Pt.
Pankaj Chattopadhyay, who himself is a renowned tabla player of Bengal.
Gradually Arupji has established himself as a top class accompanist and a formidable soloist.
He is a grade A artist of All India Radio and Doordarshan and his performances are frequently broadcast throughout the country.
Since 1998, he has been honoured to accompany the living legend Pt.
Ravi Shankarji in his tours throughout the U.S., Canada, Europe and India.
He accompanied with Pt.
Deepak Chowdhury in his U.K. tour, and with Pandit Kartick Seshadri in his U.S., Canada, Australia and Mexico tours.
Arupji is also a top class tabla teacher.He was a professor of tabla at Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan in London.
Now, he is a visiting lecturer of tabla at the University of California, San Diego.
Sadarang was the pen name of the Hindustani musical composer and artist Niyamat Khan.
Sadarang was active in the eighteenth century.
He and his nephew Adarang changed the Khayal style of Hindustani music into the form performed today.
He served in the court of Mughal Emperor Muhammad Shah.
Sadarang and Adarang remain influential in Hindustani classical music, mainly through their compositions.
He has released three World Fusion albums, and one classical Indian music album.
He has performed live around the world at various venues and for charitable causes.
Shobhakars track Water made it to the first round of the Grammy Awards.
Shobhakar was born in the east Indian state of Kolkata, but was raised in Indias financial capital city of Bombay.
Although Shobhakars parents are not musicians, they often played classical Indian records at home, which had an influence on Shobhakar.
His grandfather, Shri Bhavani Shankar Shovakar, played sitar, tabla, and sang, hosting concerts at his residence.
Shobhakars first brush with Western Music was listening to Led Zeppelin and Deep Purple, followed by Megadeth and Metallica.
During this same time, Shobhakar began experimenting with Jazz and Western Classical Music.
Indian classical music and the sarod.
I heard a Shakti record ... that re-ignited my interest in the deep melodic gravitas.
Shobhakar met Ustad Aashish Khan briefly when he came to do a concert in Bombay and stayed at Shobhakars apartment.
Shobhakar states that he was blown away by Khans command over the Sarode, and has been studying with him ever since.
Shobhakars current focus is World Fusion and Jazz Fusion.
Shobhakar recorded his first album Mysterious Awakening, in 2004.
He handled every aspect of production on the record, including tracking the guitars with a goose neck internet chat mic.
Shobhakar describes the sound of the music on the album as the best of both worlds.
The album was released by Saregama HMV.
Shobhakars album was his first major contribution to the World Fusion genre, something Shobhakar feels very passionately about.
But here its better, because I can meet a lot of different musicians, a lot of different, diverse people.
In 2009, he released an Indian Classical album, Dream Theory.
Shobhakar is currently working on a new project, The Joel Harrison - Anupam Shobhakar Quintet.
Ali Baksh Jarnail.
Ustad Ali Baksh was an Indian classical singer.
Together with Fateh Ali Khan, he founded the Patiala Gharana.
This gharana is claimed to combine the musical traditions of Delhi gharana, Gwalior Gharana and Jaipur-Atrauli Gharana.
The gharana has many notable pupils including Ustad Bade Ghulam Ali Khan, Malika Pukhraj and Gauhar Jan.
Ustad Ali Baksh Khan regularly sang with Fateh Ali Khan.
Before the partition of India they were the court musicians in Patiala.
Ali Bakash had one son, Ustad Akhtar Hussain.
Ishima was originally in the group sounds band The Beavers, who had released some singles but not had major success.
He joined Flower Travellin Band in 1969.
When Flower Travellin Band broke up in 1973, he recorded the solo album One Day.
He then joined a group called Trans Am, which was followed by the Donjuan R&R ; Band with Kenichi Hagiwara.
During the 1980s he was in Co-Colo along with Nobuhiko Shinohara.
In 2000, he recorded the album More-ish with the group Pythagorus Party.
Ali Akbar Khan.
Khan was instrumental in popularizing Indian classical music in the West, both as a performer, and as a teacher.
Khan also composed several classical ragas and film scores.
He was a Distinguished Adjunct Professor of Music at the University of California, Santa Cruz.
Khan was nominated for five Grammy Awards and was accorded Indias second highest civilian honor, the Padma Vibhushan, in 1989.
He has also won a MacArthur Fellowship and the National Endowment for the Arts s National Heritage Fellowship.
Childhood and training.
Allauddin was a perfectionist and a strict taskmaster, and Khans lessons started before dawn and often lasted 18 hours a day.
Khan also learned to play the tabla and the pakhavaj from his uncle, Aftabuddin Khan, who he visited at Shibpur.
Shankar and Annapurna Devi were married in 1941.
Of his training on the sarod, he wrote :.
In 1943, on his fathers recommendation, Khan was appointed a court musician for the Maharaja of Jodhpur, Hanwant Singh.
There, he taught and composed music besides giving recitals and was accorded the title of Ustad by the Maharaja.
He also played Sarod for a song in 1955 film Seema which had the music composed by Shankar Jaikishan.
Later in 1993, he would score some of the music for Bernardo Bertolucci Little Buddha.
Beginning in 1945, Khan also started recording a series of 78 rpm disks at the HMV Studios in Bombay.
He performed in India and traveled extensively in the West.
He founded another school of the same name in Berkeley, California in 1967 and later moved it to San Rafael, California.
Khan performed in Boston with Shankar Ghosh in 1969 for the Peabody Mason Concert series.
In 1985 he founded another branch of the Ali Akbar College of Music in Basel, Switzerland.
Khan has participated in a number of classic jugalbandi pairings, most notably with Ravi Shankar, Nikhil Banerjee and violinist L. Subramaniam.
A few recordings of duets with Vilayat Khan also exist.
He also collaborated with Western musicians.
A live album and a movie of the event were later released.
Illness and death.
Khan was based in the United States for the last four decades of his life.
Ali Akbar Khan married three times, and is survived by seven sons and four daughters.
The most notable of his children are Dhyanesh Khan, Pranesh Khan, and Alam Khan.
Khan was awarded the Padma Vibhushan in 1989, among other awards.
He received a MacArthur Fellowship in 1991.
Khan has received two Grammy nominations.
Surinder Sandhu is a sarangi player and composer.
He is a student of Sabri Khan of the Senia Rampur Moradabad gharana.
Sandhu composes in multiple genres.
His compositions combine jazz, western classical and Asian fusion music.
Guests performers on Sandhus albums include rock guitarist Steve Vai to saxophonist Andy Sheppard.
His album The Fictionist features the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra, guest musicians, and The Surinder Sandhu Band.
It was well received by critics after its release on September 29, 2008.
The album includes a symphony commissioned to celebrate Liverpool as capital of culture 2008.
Suresh Haldankar was an Indian classical singer, actor and teacher.
Born in Goa to a Daivajna family, Suresh Haldankar learned classical music from Jagannathbuwa Purohit, Ganpatrao Dewaskar and Manhar Barve.
He performed in Marathi Sangeet Natak musicals and acted alongside Bal Gandharva.
His most memorable performance was in the musical Honaji Bala.
Acharya Atre conferred upon him the title of Maharashtra Gandharva after listening to his singing in Shri Ranga Kamala Kanta.
Among his other popular songs are Vithu maza lekur wala and Govinda re gopala.
He conducted Indian classical music classes at Dadar.
Keshav is an Indian tabla player.
He is a prodigy and performed at the Delhi Commonwealth Games.
Keshav was born at Auroville in Tamil Nadu to Gopika Dahanukar.
He is the grandson of painter, Prafulla Dahanukar.
He started learning tabla when he was two years old.
Indias Most Distinguished Musician in Concert.
Indias Most Distinguished Musician In Concert is a 1962 live album released by Ravi Shankar.
It was recorded 19 November 1961 during one of Shankars early seminal American performances, at UCLA.
It was later digitally remastered and released in CD format through Angel Records.
The digital remastering was by Squires Productions.
Supporting musicians are Kanai Dutt on tabla and Nodu Mullick on Tamboura.
Nissar Hussain Khan.
Ustad Nissar Hussain Khan was a Hindustani classical vocalist from the Rampur-Sahaswan gharana.
He was the court musician of Maharaja Sayajirao Gaekwad III at Baroda and was featured extensively on All India Radio.
He was a specialist in Tarana.
His most famous disciple is Rashid Khan.
Khansahib inherited a vast repertoire of well-known and obscure melodies from his forebears.
His rich, resonant voice was cultivated through decades of training.
He embellishes the modal form of the ragas with flashes of gamaks, bol-taans and sargams.
As an exponent of the khayal style, he renders taranas with distinction.
Training Rashid Khan.
Khans most famous disciple was his grandnephew Rashid Khan.
Tutelage under his granduncle-guru changed the course of his life and made him what he is today.
Rajeev Taranath is an Indian classical musician who plays the sarod.
Taranath is a disciple of Ali Akbar Khan.
Rajeev Taranath was born in Bangalore on 17 October 1932.
He received his initial training in vocal music from his father Pandit Taranath.
He gave his first public vocal performance when he was nine years old.
Rajeev was singing for the All India Radio before he was twenty.
Rajeev continued to learn from his Guru till Khan Sahebs demise in 2009.
He has also had guidance from Pt.
Ravi Shankar, Smt.
Annapurna Devi, Pt.
Nikhil Banerjee and Ustad Aashish Khan.
In 1999-2000 he received the Indians governments highest award in the arts from the Sangeet Natak Akademi.
He researched and published the Teaching Techniques of the Maihar-Allauddin Gharana, as a Ford Foundation scholar.
He is respected for his in-depth understanding as he unfolds the raga, the tonal quality and power of his strokes.
His distinctive style shows technical excellence, imaginative power and emotional range.
According to the New York Times, RAJEEV TARANATHS sarod improvisations Sunday at Soundscape mixed the spiritual and the spirited.
Rajeev performs extensively in India and the world.
He has toured Australia, Europe, Yemen, the United States, and Canada.
He has composed the music for many internationally acclaimed Indian films including Samskara, Kanchana Sita and Kadavu.
He currently lives and teaches in Mysore, Karnataka.
Rajeev Taranth taught English literature at the University of Aden in 1980s.
He was the subject of a documentary made for the television in Aden entitled Fannan Min-Al-Hind.
Taranath has several recordings published :.
Kedar Pandit is an Indian tabla player.
Early life and background.
Kedar Pandit was born in a Marathi family to Prabhakar Pandit and Anuradha Pandit, both acclaimed violinists.
Kedar Pandit accompanies Pandit Jasraj on Tabla on all his concerts.
He also accompanies vocalist, Kaushiki Chakrabarty and Sanjeev Abhyankar.
He worked as a music director which include Films, Albums, Commercials and serials.
Mazhar Ali Khan.
Mazhar Ali Khan is a Hindustani classical vocalist of the Patiala Gharana, known for his performances of dadra and thumri.
He has performed in India, Pakistan, and North America with his brother Jawaad Ali Khan.
Mazhar Ali Khan is grandson of the doyen of the Patiala Gharana, Ustad Bade Ghulam Ali Khan.
Hirabai Barodekar was a renowned Indian Hindustani classical music singer, of Kirana gharana.
She also sang along with her younger sister, Saraswati Rane, whom she also trained, in jugalbandi style.
Early life and background.
Abdul Karim Khan was the court musician in Baroda when Tarabai was young, and he taught her music.
In their adult lives, the five respectively became known as Sureshbabu Mane, Krishnarao Mane, Hirabai Badodekar, Kamalabai Badodekar, and Sarswatibai Rane.
Hirabai Badodekar was top most artist of her time.
Hirabai was an expert in Khyal, Thumri, Marathi Natya Sangeet, and Bhajan.
She is credited with having popularized Hindustani Classical Music among the masses.
She was truly pioneer of concerts by women artists in India.
She the real pioneer and was the first female artist who introduced ticketed concerts in India.
She was always amazingly popular on stages and her shows were jam-packed.
A very fragile, honey voice, emotive factor, peaceful and exorbitant vocal clarity are her strengths.
She was admired by the real class and those were mass.
Her amazing rendition of Taar Sa was very popular and became her hallmark.
She made Kirana gharana more popular and rich.
Hirabai acted in several movies, including Suvarna Mandir, Pratibha, Janabai, and Municipality.
She also started a music school, Nutan Sangeet Vidyalaya, to teach music to girls.
The school staged several plays.
Its say that Her renditions and voice could cure a sick man as her music had access the corner stone.
Hirabai became a recording artist very early in her career.
She was titled as Gaanhira.
Her nature was so down to earth and peaceful which was truly ideal.
Hirabai received several awards, including the Sangeet Natak Akademi Award and the Padma Bhushan Award.
Vishnudas Bhave Award for her contribution to theater.
She visited China and the East African countries as a part of an Indian Delegation in 1953.
She was titled Gaan kokila by Sarojini Naidu.
She was married to Shri.
Manikrao Gandhi - Barodekar.
But she was so peaceful and truly ideal by herself.
Among Hirabais many students, Dr. Prabha Atre, Manik Varma and Saraswatibai Rane made their mark on Music horizon.
her some other students are Malati Pande, Janaki Iyer, Shaila Pandit and Suvarna Chandrashekharan.
In New York.
In New York is an EP by Hindustani classical musician Ravi Shankar.
It was released in 1968 on vinyl.
It was later digitally remastered and released in CD format through Angel Records.
Pandit Raghunandan Panshikar is a Hindustani classical vocalist.
He has received training in the Jaipur gharana.
Raghunandan began his formal study of music in Mumbai at the age of eleven.
He learned music from the late Pandit Vasantrao Kulkarni for six years.
Later he took training from Gaan Saraswati Smt.
Kishori Amonkar over the next 17 years.
During this time, Raghunandan was also fortunate to learn from Kishori-jis mother & guru, the late Gaan Tapaswini Smt.
Mogubai Kurdikar, who learned directly from Ustad Alladiya Khan, who was the founder of the Jaipur-Atrauli gharana.
Alka Yagnik is amongst the best-known playback singers of Hindi cinema with a career spanning three decades.
She was the only leading playback singer during 90s to mid 2000s.
Further, as many as 20 of her tracks feature in BBCs Top 40 Bollywood Soundtracks of all time review.
Early life and background.
Alka Yagnik was born in Kolkata on 20 March 1966.
Her mother Shubha Yagnik was a singer of Indian classical music.
She received her school education from Modern High School for Girls.
In 1972 at the age of 6, she started singing for Akashvani, Calcutta.
At age 10, her mother brought her to Mumbai as a child singer.
She was advised to wait until her voice matured, but her mother remained determined.
On a subsequent visit, Alka got a letter of introduction to Raj Kapoor from his Kolkata distributor.
Kapoor heard the girl and sent her with a letter to noted music director Laxmikant.
Alka Yagnik is classically trained.
She began singing bhajans for Akashvani, Calcutta.
at the age of six.
She got her big break with the song Ek Do Teen from the film Tezaab.
The song won her a Filmfare Best Female Playback Award.
She has also sung many duets with Abhijeet Bhattacharya, Sonu Nigam, Vinod Rathod & Shaan.
She has also rendered the Hanuman Chalisa and various devotional songs.
Alka shares the title with Asha Bhosle for the greatest number of Filmfare Awards won by a single female playback singer.
She has also been performing in live concerts around the world.
She has also been involved in various projects pertaining to empowerment of the girl child.
She has been their lead female singer throughout their career.
A. R. Rahman.
Alka gave Himesh Reshammiya his first break in the movie Pyaar Kiya To Darna Kya.
Awards and nominations.
Buddhadev Das Gupta.
Padmabhushan Pandit Buddhadev Das Gupta is an Indian classical musician who plays the sarod.
Pandit Buddhadev Das Gupta resides in Kolkata, India.
He is one of the artists featured in Nimbus Records s The Raga Guide.
Early Life and training.
His father was District Magistrate by profession and an avid lover of music although he never learnt music.
Since childhood little Buddhadev grew up with a musical atmosphere at his home.
At a very early age he started taking Sarod lessons from the eminent Sarod maestro Sangitachrya sri Radhika Mohan Maitra.
His first program in the All India Radio was as a guest artist.
Besides his world-wide fame as a Sarod maestro, Pandit Buddhadev Dasgupta has had an equally brilliant track record in Academics.
He stood 2nd in the Matriculation Examination, held in 1948.
In Jan 2012, he has been conferred with Padma Bhushan by Govt.
The book became instant hit and is a best-seller among Bengali autobiographies.
In Hindustani music, a pakad is a generally-accepted musical phrase thought to encapsulate the essence of a particular raga.
In many cases, the ragas contain the same swaras, then the pakad also contains information about gayaki or chalan.
The pakad for a particular raga need not be unique, its sole purpose is to clarify what raga it is.
For example, here is a pakad for raga Yaman, a prominent raga from Hindustani Music :.
Ni * Re Ga Ma # Pa, Ma # Ga Re Sa.
Sitar in popular music.
Early uses in Western pop music.
During a break in the filming of The Beatles second movie, Help !.
, Harrison picked up a sitar left on the set as a prop and attempted to play it.
His initial interest eventually led to his taking lessons from Pandit Ravi Shankar and Shambhu Das.
A later Beatles song, Across the Universe, also featured the sitar.
Additionally, Harrison made great use of the sitar on his first solo album, 1968s Wonderwall Music.
Jones also played sitar on some tracks of Between the Buttons and Their Satanic Majesties Request.
Despite producing similar sounds, the two instruments are completely different.
Elvis Presley had several recordings that prominently featured the electric sitar.
In the instances of Hi-Heel Sneakers and Snowbird, Nashville, Tennessee session musician Harold Bradley played the electric sitar.
Steve Miller Band used sitar in their popular song Wild Mountain Honey.
Jethro Tull used the sitar on Fat Man and Skating Away on the Thin Ice of the New Day.
Richie Havens made extensive use of the sitar in the title song of his second album, Something Else Again.
Blue Cheer used both sitar and tabla in their song, Babji.
Although the sitar craze had died down by 1970, its distinctive sound had become an indelible part of pop music.
Other songs featuring the sitar are :.
Childhood and training.
Ashok was only 2 years older than Ashwin and seeing his friend perform made Ashwin think that he could too.
In 1964, Ashwins father left India to visit one of his daughters in England.
Ashwin turned to his mother and shared with her his secret wish to play the sitar.
She bought him a student model sitar and started teaching him herself, as she had played the sitar when young.
His mother had also presented him with some sitar albums by Ravi Shankar.
Ashwin would listen and copy all the songs to the best of his abilities.
Ashwin wasted no time in whipping out the songs he heard from these Western artists.
Ashwin also started learning compositions in various ragas.
His father would often sing and have Ashwin copy the musical phrases.
He also taught Ashwin many songs based in various ragas he had studied with his Guruji Shri Chandan Ram Charan.
By age 16, Ashwin had started to accompany his father on various programs.
He also started getting calls to play for college nights for which a local tabla player would accompany him.
One such memorable event was when he performed for an OXFAM benefit in England.
Ashwin was put on a rigorous practice schedule.
The cold English weather meant that there was only one warm room in the house where all his family would gather.
On one such day, Ashwin was practicing.
When he stopped playing, there was silence in the room.
Ashwin learnt from this experience and started to tune into this new sense of expressive musical attraction.
He fine-tuned this ability in his live performances.
Ashwin is presently teaching Indian music at his music school in Santa Cruz, California.
He also publishes an online magazine that is mostly educational in nature called RagaNet.
It provides regular lessons on sitar, tabla, Dilruba, History of India music, etc.
Articles on musical instruments of India are also a regular feature.
He did not last long at Shanachie due to disappointing sales reports and lack of support.
Ashwin soon formed his own record label, Batish Records to publish all his familys works.
This has given a voice to over 50 years of archived audio and video content.
Ustad Kirit Khan was a talented Sitar player of the Indian subcontinent.
He was born on October 29, 1955 in Comilla, Bangladesh and later settled in Kolkata, India.
Kirit Khan died prematurely in 2006 due to kidney failure.
At the age of seven, Kirit started learning music.
First he took his lessons on Tabla and later on Sitar.
He learnt Sitar from his father Ustad Bahadur Khan till his death in 1989.
He acquired sheer virtuosity in his fingers under the strict mentorship of his father.
From then on he played Sitar at home and abroad consistently.
Performance in major concerts in India.
Among his memorable concerts is a duet performance with his father in the Sursringer Music Conference in Mumbai in 1986.
In the same year he participated in a duet concert with his father in Tansen Music Conference.
In 1991 he was highly appreciated at the Surdas Music Conference in Kolkata.
In 1999 he was highly acclaimed by audience at the Dover lane Music Conference in Kolkata.
He had toured different countries in the world performing with his Sitar since 1978.
The first countries he toured are Russia, and Cuba.
Then in 1988 he rendered his recitals in Germany, and England.
In 1989 he played sitar in Middle East.
In 1999 he performed in Denmark, Switzerland, N. Ireland, and Scotland.
In 2003 he performed in South America, and Sweden.
Awards and recognition.
He received several awards and appreciation for his contribution in music.
In 1984 he obtained the title Suramani from the ` Haridas Music Conference ', and later Surjhankar in Mumbai.
Music direction in films.
Besides playing sitar he also engaged himself as a music director in different films.
He was the solo music director of the film Nilkanya.
He started a documentary film called ` Gharana and Parampara ' which has been sponsored by Government of India.
The theme of the film was to make the younger generation aware of Parampara and concept of Gharana.
He was a visiting teacher on sitar in Indian Music Academy in Frankfurt, Germany.
Patdeep is a Hindustani classical raga.
Arohana and Avarohana.
The raag has komal Ga.
It is an Audava-Sampoorna raga, implying that it has 5 notes in Arohana and 7 in Avarohana.
Organization and relationships.
Nyaas : g, P and N.
Vincent McDermott is a classically trained American composer and ethnomusicologist.
His works show particular influence from the musics of South and Southeast Asia, particularly the gamelan music of Java.
He is among the second generation of American composers to create and promote new compositions for gamelan.
His composition instructors included Constant Vauclain, George Rochberg, Darius Milhaud, and Karlheinz Stockhausen.
In 1980, McDermott became friends with Lou Harrison, the godfather of American gamelan.
It was Harrison who encouraged McDermott to start composing for gamelan.
McDermott first encountered gamelan c. 1965 in Amsterdam.
He later studied Javanese gamelan in Indonesia at the Akademi Seni Karawitan Indonesia in Central Java.
Many of McDermotts works are written for standard Western ensembles.
In 1969 he began to incorporate sounds and ideas from North Indian music.
In 1980 Lou Harrison encouraged McDermott to begin composing for gamelan.
He has received several Fulbright grants and National Endowment for the Arts commissions.
He was a recipient of a Masters Award from the Oregon Arts Commission.
McDermotts compositions have been performed in North America, Europe, and Asia.
From the earliest period he was drawn to cross-cultural works, multimedia, and theatrical music.
These interests continue to this day.
Two of his operas, The King of Bali and Mata Hari, juxtapose gamelan and Western ensembles.
His musical styles have swayed in different directions.
Instead he turned increasingly to modality, melody, and counterpoint, which styles have continued since.
His compositional goals are expressivity, depth, and spirituality, yet often with a light heart.
But he insists the soul of their music as well as many of its techniques must come from their own soil.
He directed the gamelan and later invited Javanese musicians to teach.
He also instituted classes in Indian and African music performance with Nisha Joshi and Obo Addy.
He has since helped to establish gamelan programs at the College of William and Mary and the University of Puget Sound.
He has also written articles on various subjects for various music journals.
He presently divides his time between Yogyakarta, Java and the United States.
In Yogyakarta, he directs an ensemble called Musica Teatrica Nova.
+1978 - Smoke of Burning Cloves, solo instrument.
Mohammad Hussain Sarahang.
Ustad Mohammad Hussain Sarahang was an Afghan musician and best known exponent of hindustani classical music from Kabul Afghanistan.
He was the second oldest son of the renowned musician, Ustad Ghulam Hussain.
Mohammad Hussain was born and raised in Kharabat, a city famous and conceivably notorious for its musicians.
Career and education.
Hussain then studied Indian Classical Music in the Patiala School of Music in India.
After 16 years of learning from Ustad Ashiq Ali Khan, he returned to Kabul at the age of 25.
Soon afterward he was awarded the title of Sarahang by the government of Afghanistan.
Ustad Sarahang performed various genres of classical and semi-classical music, including khayal, thumri, tarana, and ghazal.
He earned the following titles and degrees from various music schools of India :.
Sarahang recorded roughly 500 raga performances and ghazals in India and at Radio Kabul.
He wrote two books about classical music, Qanun-e Tarab and Mussiqi-e Rag-ha.
He has also created or composed several ragas including Hazra and Minamalee.
Festival of Music in Kabul.
At the age of 25, Ustad Mohammad Hussain Sarahang participated in a festival of music held at Kabuls famed Pamir Cinema.
Amongst the participants were Ustad Qasim and Ustad Bade Ghulam Ali Khan.
Qanon e Tarab : Explaining the rules of eastern music.
Ustad Sarahang also wrote many articles in Pashtun Ghag newspaper.
Fame in India.
In India, Ustad Sarahang was an idol to be worshipped.
Radhika Mohan Maitra.
Radhika Mohan Maitra was an Indian sarod player.
Maitra was considered an influential figure in 20th century sarod playing and received the title Sangeetacharya.
Early life and background.
Radhubabu later studied dhrupad with the famous beenkar Dabir Khan and sitar with Enayat Khan.
Maitras debut concert was in Calcutta, in the home of another aristocratic family, the Gangulys, who were also patrons of music.
Two of the Ganguly brothers, Shyam and Hirendra Kumar became renowned sarod and tabla players, respectively.
It was at this same conference that he gave a duet concert with Allauddin Khan at the latters invitation.
Maitra was a prolific composer and perhaps the only keen student of sarod technique in his era.
Later life and death.
In October 1981, Maitra died of brain hemorrhage as a result of an accident in his south Calcutta home.
As a teacher, Radhika Mohan Maitra had very few equals.
Of his students, Kalyan Mukherjea and Samarendra Sikdar are the closest to his personal sound and style.
Radhubabu was temperamentally and culturally unlike the professional musicians of his time.
As a result, he was never a commercially successful musician.
Radhika Mohan Maitra was also exceptionally well-educated for an Indian musician of his era.
He had a masters degree in Philosophy, and trained as a lawyer.
It is a 4 day musical extravaganza.
Artist and music lovers from all over the world gather here to pay tribute to the Great Indian Musical Maestro Tansen.
The event is organized near the tomb of Tansen by the Academy of the department of culture, Government of Madhya Pradesh.
Artists from all over India are invited to deliver vocal and instrumental performances.
National Tansen Samman.
The prestigious National Tansen Samman is a musical award conferred to the exponents of Indian music.
National Tansen Samman has been conferred to noted vocalist duo of Rajan and Sajan Mishra.
Tansen Samaroh 2012.
It has a long tubular body made of wood or bamboo with a length between 54 and 62 inches.
Two large-sized, round resonators, made of dried and hollowed gourds, are attached under the tube.
Twenty-four brass-fitted raised wooden frets are fixed on the tube with the help of wax.
There are 4 main strings and 3 chikari strings.
As Rudra is a name for the Hindu god Shiva, rudra vina literally means the veena dear to Shiva.
It is an ancient instrument rarely played today.
This produced a soft and deep sound when plucked without the use of any plectrum.
Rahul Sharma is an Indian classical musician of Hindustani classical music.
He plays santoor and is also a vocalist.
His grandfather, Uma Dutt Sharma, was a master of the santoor.
Shivkumar Sharma, his father, mastered the instrument by experimenting with various striking positions and tones.
As Shivkumars status rose in the musical circles of Jammu & Kashmir, word of his performances grew over borders and continents.
Rahul Sharma continued the tradition of the instrument.
He was always in love with music, singing and playing the harmonium at an early age.
Learning the santoor at age 13, he wasnt completely sure of pursuing music until he turned 17.
After studying economics at Mumbais Mithibai College, Rahul Sharma began performing with his father.
He started accompanying him in concerts in 1996, at the age of 24.
Rahul has performed in North America and throughout Europe, and at various folk and world music festivals, including WOMAD.
He quickly became a sought after concert artist, and has released several CDs, some solo and some with his father.
He has collaborated with international musicians like pianist Richard Clayderman and keyboardist Kersi Lord.
The Confluence has mostly Indian titles, six of which were composed by Rahul Sharma himself.
His last album Time Traveler which has been described as New-Age was released on March 10, 2006.
He collaborates with Ustad Zakir Hussain, Pt Bhavani Shankar Kathak, Shafat Ahmed Khan tabla.
Vijay Kichlu is an Indian Classical singer.
He studied Dhrupad with the Dagar Brothers and Khayal with Latafat Hussain Khan, whose style had a strong connection with Dhrupad.
He and his brother, Ravi Kichlu, formed a famous classical vocalist duo.
Sudhirkumar Saxena was a tabla artist and professor.
He learnt the tabla performing art for years from Ustad Habeebuddin Khan, the doyen of the Ajrada gharana.
Pandit Saxena was the first drummer in India to have worked as professor of tabla at a centre of higher learning.
Spending his formative years in Meerut, he also graduated in Political Science.
He in his era, played with most of the stalwarts of Indian Classical Music at that time.
He was an extremely humble person and one of the best Gurus one could ever meet.
He never declined to teach anyone who came to him for help.
Right from teaching seasoned musicians, he taught even naive beginners - sometimes free of cost.
His book The Art of Tabla Rhythm - Essentials, Tradition & Creativity is one of the best books written on Tabla.
He was the first guru of tabla player Divyang Vakil.
Arohana, Arohanam or Aroha, in the context of Indian classical music, is the ascending scale of notes in a raga.
The pitch increases as we go up from Shadja to the Taar Shadja, possibly in a crooked manner.
In Multani, the aroha is N S g M P N S.
In Abhogi ragam, which is a janya ragam of 22nd melakarta Kharaharapriya, the Arohana is S R2 G1 M1 D2 S.
In this ragam certain notes are excluded so the raga is totally changed.
Ragas & Talas.
Ragas & Talas is an album by Hindustani classical musician Ravi Shankar.
It was released in 1964 on vinyl.
It was later digitally remastered and released in CD format through Angel Records.
Multani is a Hindustani classical raga.
The newer raga Madhuvanti was inspired by Multani.
Samvadi - Sa.
Mian Ghulam Nabi Shori.
Mian Ghulam Nabi Shori popularly known as Shori Mian was an Indian composer of Hindustani classical music.
He was a court singer of Asaf-Ud-Dowlah, Nawab of Awadh.
He composed tappa, one of the most difficult classical forms, in Punjab.
The brisk and ornate tappa form, romantic in nature, tappas text is always in Punjabi.
It was supposed to be a song of the cameleers of Punjab and Rajasthan.
Born in Punjab to Ghulam Rasool Khan.
The common myth tells that he was initially trained in Khayal singing and had a great command on Taan.
He composed Tappa using various ornamentations with Taan, Jamjama, Khatka, etc.
In the Tappas of Shori Miyan, in Antara we find his name as Shori.
Pannalal Ghosh, also known as Amal Jyoti Ghosh, was a Bengali Indian flute player and composer.
He was a disciple of Allauddin Khan, and is credited with giving the flute its status in Hindustani classical music.
Ghosh was born on 24 July 1911 in Barisal, East Bengal in British India.
He was named Amal Jyoti Ghosh with Pannalal having been his nickname.
His father, Akshay Kumar Ghosh, was a sitarist.
Ghosh received his initial training in music from his father, learning to play the sitar.
Two apocryphal incidents in his childhood are believed to have influenced Ghosh in taking up the flute.
The family 's ancestral house was on the banks of the Kirtankhola river.
The flute part of the stick was longer than a traditional flute and Ghosh started practising on it.
When Ghosh obliged, the man blessed him and said that music would be his salvation.
He was married to Parul Ghosh in 1924 when she was only nine and he was thirteen years old.
She was the younger sister of Ghosh 's friend Anil Biswas who went on to become a celebrated music composer.
Parul was a talented singer herself and later became a well-known playback singer.
In 1928, Ghosh became a part of the Indian Independence Movement.
He joined a gymnasium and learnt martial arts, boxing and stick fighting.
As he became more involved in the independence movement, the government started keeping a close watch.
Consequently he shifted to Calcutta at the age of seventeen in search of a livelihood.
At the age of eighteen, he started focusing his attention on the flute.
Ghosh realised that a bigger flutes pitch and sonority would be more appropriate for both classical and light music.
Ghosh experimented with various materials including metal and different types of wood, and decided on using bamboo.
He finally settled on a flute which was thirty two inches long.
Pannalal Ghosh jointly scoring the background for  Aandhiyan  in 1952 along with Ustad Ali Akbar Khan and Pandit Ravi Shankar.
He was the first to introduce the seven hole flute.
Authentic list of Pt.
Pannalal Ghosh 's noteworthy students at Calcutta contained Haripada Choudhary, Aminur Rehman, Fakirchanda Samanta, Sudhanshu Choudhury, Mukul Roy and Gaur Goswami.
Esa Holopainen is a Finnish guitarist.
He is the main songwriter, current lead guitarist, and founding member of the Finnish metal band Amorphis and Chaosbreed.
His influences include Ritchie Blackmore, David Gilmour, John McLaughlin and Petri Walli of Kingston Wall.
Holopainen uses ESP guitars and Koch amplifiers.
Yashwant Sadashiva Buwa commonly referred as Mirashi Buwa was an Indian classical singer in khyal - genre of Hindustani classical music.
He was a noted disciple of Balakrishnabuwa Ichalkaranjikar of Gwalior gharana, along with Vishnu Digambar Paluskar.
He was known for his fast taans.
He was also an actor and had performed in many of the Sangeet Nataks, Marathi theatre musicals.
He was born in 1883 in Ichalkaranji in present Kolhapur district, Maharashtra.
He worked with theatre company Natyakala Pravartak Mandali in Pune, from 1911 to 1932, and also taught music to numerous disciples.
He died on January 5, 1966.
His notable disciples include Vinayakbuva Utturkar and Yashawantbuva Joshi of Mumbai.
Shaik Dawood Khan.
Shaik Dawood Khan also known as Ustad Shaik Dawood & Sheik Dawood, was a performer on the Indian tabla.
He was formerly a staff artist in All India Radio.
Ustad Shaik Dawood Khan was born in Sholapur.
His father Hashim Sahib was a draughtsman in the PWD, Bijapur.
Shaik Dawood received his training under several notable masters.
In his lifetime he accompanied most of the great musicians of the era.
In his life he received numerous awards.
These include the prestigious Sangeet Natak Akademi Award - 1991.
Unfortunately he was too ill to attend the award ceremony and died shortly after the awards ceremony.
Pandit Devabrata Chaudhuri is a Sitarist and a teacher.
He is the winner of the Padmabhsushan and Padmashree awards.
He is the writer of three books, composer of eight new raga 's and numerous musical compositions.
From 1963 he has appeared in numerous radio broadcasts, and he is a disciple of Mushtaq Ali Khan.
He is considered a leading Sitarist of Post War era.
He is regarded as one of the leading proponents of Senia Style.
He is the former Dean and Head, Faculty of Music, University of Delhi.
His music is noted for its sweet sinking ringing tone.
He currently stays with his son, daughter-in law and niece at Chittaranjan Park, New Delhi.
Chaudhuri was born in 1935 in Mymensing.
He started playing the Sitar from four years of age.
His first broadcast was at the age of eighteen at the All India Radio in 1953.
He received his education in the University of Calcutta.
He has served as a visiting professor at the MIU, Iowa from 1991 to 1994.
He received his training in Sitar under late Panchu Gopal Ratna and Ushtad Mustaq Ali Khan.
He started paying the Sitar from four years of age.
His first broadcast was at the age of twelve at the All India Radio in 1953.
He created 8 new Ragas viz.
Bisweswari, Palas-Sarang, Anuranjani, Ashiqui Lalit, Swanandeswari, Kalyani Bilawal, Shivamanjari and Prabhati Manjari.
He has recorded 24 CD 's for 24 hours of the day in USA.
He is also unique I using the 17 fret sitar while most musicians use the 19 fret sitar.
In April 2010 he started the UMAK Center for culture in memory of his  guru  Ustad Mushtaq Ali Khan.
Saraswati Rane was an Indian classical singer in the Hindustani Classical genre.
She was a daughter of Ustad Abdul Karim Khan, the founder of Kirana Gharana.
Her family had a long and great music tradition.
Later she also sang along with elder sister, Hirabai Bododekar, especially in jugalbandi style.
Early life and training.
After separating from her husband, Tarabai, her mother, renamed all her five children ; hence Sakina became Kumari Saraswati Mane.
In 1933, she started performing on Akashwani.
She was amongst the first female artists to give playback for Hindi and Marathi films.
Her first playback was in Marathi film Payachi Dasi, directed by Acharya Atre.
She remained in the field till 1954.
Her song from the Hindi film Ramrajya.
She also gave playback for Hindi film, Sargam, and Bhumika, directed by noted director Shyam Benegal.
Saraswatibai was invited to participate on the eve of first independence Day at Delhi.
She often performed at the Pune Sawai Gandharva Music Festival.
Saraswatibai and her elder sister, Hirabai Barodekar were the first to start the concept of jugalbandi vocal recital by ladies.
Their jugalbandi recital was appreciated all over the world and got an overwhelming response from 1965 to 1980.
Their jugalbandi records and now cassettes are still in demand.
Her grand daughter Meena Faterpekar is one of the very few female classical vocalists from Kirana Gharana pursuing the same tradition.
She was married to Sunderrao Rane.
She died on 10 October 2006.
Awards & recognition.
Sarswatibai was awarded : 1.
Balgandharva Purskar 2.
Balgandharva Gold Medal 3.
ITC Sangeet Research Academy Award 4.
Yeshwantrao Chavan Puraskar 5.
Guru Mahatmya Puraskar 6.
Ustad Faiyaz Ahmed Khan Memorial Trust.
Tana Mana is an album by Indian musician Ravi Shankar, originally credited to the Ravi Shankar Project and released in 1987.
The album is an experimental work by Shankar, mixing traditional instrumentation with 1980s electronic music and sampling technology.
The album title translates to mean body and mind.
In addition to his familiar instrument, the sitar, Shankar plays synthesizer extensively on the recording.
Background and recording.
Shankar recalls recording two or three pieces on synthesizer before having to depart for India.
Up to five new pieces were also recorded at this time, according to Shankars recollection.
One of the additional tracks was Friar Park, featuring Shankars friend and sometime collaborator George Harrison.
Other Western musicians who contributed to the album include Al Kooper, on electric guitar, and Ric Parnell, playing electronic drums.
I dedicate this song to her beautiful spirit.
The title translates to mean body and mind.
Another track, Memory of Uday, is dedicated to Uday Shankar, who died in Calcutta in 1977.
Release and legacy.
Private Music released Tana Mana in 1987, with the album credited to the Ravi Shankar Project.
Inside the Kremlin and Passages, the latter a collaboration with American composer Philip Glass.
Tana Mana, Friar Park and West Eats Meat later appeared on In Celebration, which Harrison compiled to celebrate Shankars 75th birthday.
But I did all this without compromising on the solid foundation of our classical music.
If few musicians didnt understand me then it was their problem.
I have no regrets.
All songs by Ravi Shankar.
Sarosh is a trained tabla player from the Sangeet Mahabharti Institute.
The Institute was founded by the Late Pandit Nikhil Ghosh.
He started his career as a tabla player and then started singing.
Tishnagi contains 8 tracks.
The Forever Green anthem was created for an awareness campaign titled - Do We Really Think Green.
The campaign was also recognized by United Nations Environment Programme on World Environment Day.
The music for the anthem is given by the music composer Lalit Pundit.
Biswajit Roy Chowdhury.
In 1978, Roy Chowdhurys talents were spotted by the Maestro Ustad Amjad Ali Khan accepting him as a disciple.
A turning point came when Pandit Mallikarjun Mansur took an interest in young Roy Chowdhurys quest in 1982.
The union of an instrument player with Pandit Mansur set the journey on the path of fulfilling this quest.
He is perhaps the only Sarod player who plays the coveted compositions from the Jaipur-Atrauli tradition.
He recorded the album The Sarod Master for Hot Club Records, produced by guitar player Jon Larsen.
Ayaan Ali Khan.
Ayaan Ali Khan is an Indian classical musician who plays the sarod.
He has also released solo albums and collaborations with brother and father.
Early life and career.
Khan has performed with his father and brother since the late 1980s and performed at Carnegie Hall in 1997.
He released his solo debut album of classical music in 1999.
In 2002, Khan and his brother wrote a book about their father, Abba : Gods Greatest Gift To Us.
They were awarded a Lycra Style Award from MTV India in 2006.
Khan and his brother also sing, including on the 2007 tribute album Remembering Mahatma Gandhi.
Khan joined his family to perform for the Parliament of India in 2007.
They released a Sufi music album called Rang in 2012.
They also released an album called Headwaters in October 2013.
Ayaan already shows some of his fathers authority.
- The New York Times.
Ayaan Ali Khan represents the seventh generation of a musical lineage known as the Senia Bangash School.
He has given many other solo performances and also assisted his illustrious father at concerts all over the world.
Over the years today, Ayaan has carved out a special niche for himself in the world of music.
His approach, vision and versatility make him an icon for the youth in the music industry.
Ayaan has won the hearts of music lovers both in India and abroad.
He made his UK debut in 1989 and US Debut in 1991 at the Asia Society in New York.
Ayaan made his debut tour in Australia early this year.
In 2000, Ayaan joined his father at the Dalai Lama 's Sacred Music Festival inauguration in New Delhi.
In May 2003, Ayaan performed for Prince Charles his High Grove Estate for Temenos Academy.
In 2005 he composed the music score for Roger Christian 's film  American Daylight.
In 2005 Ayaan collaborated with Guitarist Dereck Truks of the Allman Brother 's band at the Savannah Festival.
Ayaan performed at the Central Hall of the Indian Parliament on the commemoration of Indias 60th year of Independence in 2007.
He also released two albums titled  The Music Room  and  Sarod Symphony  with his father and guru in 2010.
In November 2002, Ayaan co-authored a book with his brother, Amaan titled ` Abba-God 's Greatest Gift to us '.
In 2010 Ayaan and Amaan, released their second book titled  50 Maestros 50 Recordings  which was published by Harper Collins.
Ayaan recently performed his father 's Sarod Concert Samaagam with the London Philharmonia Orchestra conducted by David Murphy.
Ayaan and Amaan Ali Khan dropped their family surname Bangash in 2006.
Mohammad Hashem Cheshti.
Several of his close family members, including his brothers and his father are/were also famous musicians in their own right.
He accompanied regularly other famous Afghan musicians like Ahmad Zahir and Ustad Mahwash on his tabla.
He mastered many different traditional Afghan instruments, but his greatest passion was for the tabla, his mastership of which was supreme.
Ektal or Ektaal is one of the most famous talas in Indian music.
It is commonly used in classical music like kheyal, and semiclassical forms like Rabindra Sangeet.
In ektal the 12 matras are divided into 6 vibhags of two matras each.
The form of Ektal is as follows :.
Tap, Clap, Wave, Clap, Tap, Clap, Wave, Clap, Tap, Clap, Clap, Clap.
It has a characteristic pattern of bols which goes as follows :.
Jahan-e-Khusrau was started in the year 2001 by noted film director, Muzaffar Ali.
Swami Haridas Sangeet Sammelan.
Swami Haridas Sangeet Sammelan is an Hinduatani classical music held annually in Mumbai, India.
All the prominent artists perform at the festival.
It was started in 1945 in honor of 16th century saint, Swami Haridas.
Arvind Parikh is a Hindustani classical musician and sitar player.
Arvind parikh was born in Ahmedabad into a Gujrati Business Family with cultural and spiritual influences.
His father was a businessman and mother was a painter.
His primary and secondary education continued in a nationalist school.
Later he started sitar, which he found suited him best.
In 1944, at the age of 17, he moved to Mumbai and started learning from sitar maestro Ustad Vilayat Khan.
Per Khans wish Parikh entered Bombay University, along with the music education from Khan.
Parikh got admission in Elphinstone College, Bombay.
His musical education continued uninterrupted throughout his performing career, from 1944 to 2004 until Khans death.
Arvind Parikh is having a performing career spanning over six decades.
Association with different learned musicians and vocalists helped him in his research work on different rare ragas and compositions.
He has performed in India and abroad.
Parikh is a regular broadcaster on All India Radio.
His approach towards music, collection of authentic bandishes, and approach of teaching were praised.
His daughter Purvi Parikh is also a classical vocalist and learnt music from many greats including her parents.
Mrs. Parikh was disciple of Niyaz Ahmad-Faiyaz Ahmad Khan of Kirana Gharana.
Parikh has documented most of the precious compositions and ragas.
Sitar Guru, Bandish Parampara published by Navras records UK are some of the testimonies of his work.
He was vice president of the International Music Council during 1994-97 and is currently co-ordinator for the Indian sub-continent.
He is President of the Indian Musicological Society, chairman of the Western India Chapter of ITC-Sangeet Research Academy.
Parikh conceived establishing a forum at which all segments of the music world could meet to discuss issues of common interests.
Music forums are established in Mumbai, Chennai, Kolkata and Delhi.
Awards and recognition.
Parikh has been awarded the Gaurav Puraskar for the year 1997-98 by the Gujarat State Sangeet Natak Academy.
He has also been awarded the National Award by Sangeet Natak Akademi for Instrumental music for the year 2003.
He is a top grade artist and a regular broadcaster of All India Radio.
Parikh has handled the pursuits of business and music simultaneously.
Parikhs business is a logistics provider in 51 Indian cities.
Its latest joint venture with Deutsche Post and DHL as DHL Lemuir Logistics Pvt. Ltd.
Vidya Rao is an Hindustani classical singer and writer.
She is popular for her Thumri and Dadra.
She wrote a book on the late Naina Devi, Heart to Heart : Remembering Nainaji.
Life and career.
Vidya Rao grew up in Hyderabad.
She did her graduation in Madras, she joined the Delhi School of Economics to do M.A. in Sociology.
She worked with Centre for Womens Development Studies as a researcher for five years before quitting to concentrate on music.
She renders poetry of mystics like, Amir Khusro, Kabir etc.
Sharif Khan Poonchwaley.
He learned sitar from his father Ustad Rahim Bakhsh Khan, who himself was a student of Ustad Imdad Khan.
He learned vichitra veena from Ustad Abdul Aziz Khan Beenkar.
Ustad Sharif Khan Poonchwala, belongs to Poonch gharana of sitar.
He played a key role in promoting the sitar in Pakistan.
Everywhere he went he charmed audiences with his stylishness, registering the intricacies and subtleties of otherwise typical ragas.
Sharif Khan was awarded the Pride of Performance Award in 1968.
Siddheswari Devi was a Hindustani singer from Varanasi, India, known as Maa.
Born in 1908, she lost her parents early and was brought up by her aunt, the noted singer Rajeshwari Devi.
Initiation into music.
Despite living in a musical household, Siddheswari came to music by accident.
Rajeshwari had arranged musical training for her own daughter, Kamleshwari, while Siddheswari would do small chores around the house.
Rajeshwari ran out of patience, and started to cane Kamleshwari, who cried out for help.
At this point, Siddheswari told her weeping cousin, Its not so difficult to sing what Siyaji Maharaj was telling you.
Siddheswari then showed her how to sing it, performing the whole tune perfectly, much to the amazement of everyone.
The next day, Siyaji Maharaj came to Rajeshwari, and asked to adopt Siddheswari into his own family.
So Siddheswari moved in with the couple, eventually becoming a great friend and support for them.
She sang khyal, thumri and short classical forms as dadra, chaiti, kajri etc.
On several occasions she would sing perform through the night, for example on the overnight boating expeditions of Maharaja of Darbhanga.
In 1989, noted director Mani Kaul has made an award winning documentary, Siddheswari, on her life.
She won many accolades during her career, including :.
She died in 1976.
Her daughter Savita Devi is also a musician and lives in Delhi.
Jagannath buwa Purohit was a singer and teacher of Hindustani classical music.
He learnt under various gurus, the chief being Vilayat Hussein Khan of Agra Gharana.
Buwas colophon was Gunidas.
Oldest gharana, from Mughal courts, authentic and.
unadulterated style, focus on correctness, laya-pradhan because of origins in.
Tansen, Faiyyaz Khan, V.N.Bhatkhande, Jagannath.
Buwa Purohit, S.N.Ratanjankar, K.G.Ginde,.
His disciples include Jitendra Abhisheki, Pandit Ram Marathe, Pandit Vasantrao Kulkarni, C. R. Vyas, Pt Yashwant buwa Joshi and Manik Verma.
Pt Bhai Gaitonde, living legend of Farukhabad gharana of Tabla, received his initial training from Pt Jagannath Buwa.
Buwa was devoted to his teachers in a day when the teachers were known for being whimsical.
He was born in a Karhade Brahmin family in the erstwhile Nizam state of Hyderabad.
He had basic primary education in Marathi, his mother tongue.
As was the tradition then and even now, musical talent of a person was carefully nourished through an age old custom.
Living with ones teacher, Guru.
This created a definite bond between the teacher and his disciple.
In Hyderabad, as well as many other princely states, certain musicians, be it vocal or instrumental, were patronized by the ruler.
Therefore, young Jagannath picked up many a veteran musicians to learn his trade.
He changed his teachers as many times as he could afford to.
Not that he paid any tuition of any kind.
Serving ones teachers fancies and temper is the fee.
Learned Indian percussion instrument, Tabla, very well to the point that he became a master.
Took lessons from famous teacher, Ustad Thirkawa.
That was the most fortunate thing happening to this talented lad.
They, teacher and student, clicked together and Jagannaths travail was duly rewarded.
He not only received excellent training from Vilayat Khan but his admiration as well.
Jagannath was not only a fine vocalist but was an avid creator of Hindustani original themes, cheej.
He was a celibate and had to fend for himself.
It was tough to say the least.
He managed somehow.
It requires a creativity to develop newer and fancier rendering of the traditional Ragas.
Not many can do such original renderings.
Most just copy whatever their teachers teach them and keep the style as dictated by the dynastic principles, gayaki.
One of his disciple from Pune has said following about Jagannaths musical philosophy :.
Jagannath Buwa often told me that the basic requirement of music is that magical quality called  Rang.
As a quality in music,  Rang  transcends considerations of voice quality, grammar and communication of rasa.
While in Mumbai, he was not only admired by many a musical lovers but by generous supporters.
Two among them were V V Gokhale and his younger brother, Va Va Gokhale of Dadar.
He was a regular performer at Dadar-Matunga Music Club.
He died at Dombivli on a Diwali day in 1968.
He was cremated at Dadar.
He was also known for his high social conscience.
After the war was over, he contributed generously to the Relief Fund for soldiers.
Early life and education.
Gandharva was born in Sulebhavi near Belgaum, Karnataka, India.
He studied music under the well-known Prof B. R. Deodhar.
He married Bhanumati Kans in April 1947 and moved to Dewas, Madhya Pradesh.
Soon after moving there, he was stricken with tuberculosis.
Luckily, the wonder drugs which cure TB had only recently been discovered.
Gradually, helped by excellent medical support and care from wife Bhanumati, Kumar Gandharva recovered and began singing again.
Bhanumati Kans, who was learning music first under Deodhar and later under Kumar Gandharva himself, nursed him through his illness.
His first mehfil after recovery from illness took place in 1953.
His innovative approach towards music led to the creation of new ragas from combinations of older ragas.
His style of singing attracted considerable controversy.
According to Pandharinath Kolhapures book on Kumar Gandharva, Deodhar was against the match.
But the criticism mostly centred around his vilambit gayaki.
His singing in faster tempos, particularly his mastery over madhya-laya, was widely revered.
Kumar Gandharvas first son, Mukul Shivputra, was born around 1955.
After Bhanumatis death in 1961 during childbirth, Kumar married Vasundhara Shrikhande, another of his fellow-students at Deodhar School.
Vasundhara Komkalimath formed a memorable duo with him in bhajan singing.
She also provided vocal support to his classical renditions quite often.
Their daughter Kalapini Komkalimath would later accompany both her parents on tanpura.
Kumarjis grandson Bhuvanesh has also made a name for himself as classical singer.
For a long spell, Kumar Gandharvas activities as a musician were managed by his friend and tabla accompanist Vasant Acharekar.
His son Suresh Acharekar is also a tabla player, and has accompanied Kumar Gandharva and other artists.
Kumarji had friendly relations with noted Marathi literary couple Pu La Deshpande and Sunita Deshpande.
Kumar Gandharva was awarded the Padma Vibhushan award in 1990.
His song Sunta Hai actually forms the title of the movie Koi Sunta Hai.
Hans Akela is a 1 hour 18 minute documentary on Pandit Kumar Gandharva made by Films Division Govt.
of India with interviews with various people - wife, friends, students.
Mukkam Vashiis a book made on notes collected during a 2 day workshop of the same name.
It collected together the thoughts of Pandit Kumar Gandharva on the nature of music at a fundamental level.
An Appreciation of Kumar Gandharva.
Sharda Sinha is a folk-singer and professor of music from Samastipur, Bihar.
Sharda Sinha sings Maithili, Bhojpuri and Magahi songs, has received Padma Shri for her contribution to music.
She regularly performs during Durga Puja festivities.
She performed when the Prime Minister of Mauritius Navin Ramgoolam came to, Bihar.
Bihar kokila Sharda Sinha performed at Pragati Maidan in the Bihar Utsav, 2010, New Delhi.
Sinha started the programme with her patriotic song Maiya bharti pukarela jawan babua tora hathawa mein deshwa ke shaan babuwa.
Sharda Sinha also sung the famous song Taar Bijli from Bollywood film Gangs of Wasseypur Part 2.
Bansuri Guru is a 2013 Indian documentary film about the life of classical instrumentalist Pandit Hariprasad Chaurasia.
Directed by Rajeev Chaurasia as his directorial debut, the film is introduced by Amitabh Bachchan.
Vasantrao Deshpande was a renowned Hindustani classical vocalist who was also a great performer of Natya Sangeet.
Early life and background.
Vasantrao Deshpande was born in Murtijapur, District Akola, which belongs to Vidarbha region of State of Maharashtra, in India.
He learned from several gurus, refusing to tie himself down to a single school of singing.
One of Indias most illustrious classical vocalists, he performed classical and semi-classical music.
In the raga form which constitutes classical music, the artist displays his creativity on a basic canvas.
His performance of offbeat ragas was not too different.
The sargam was his forte.
He was also an accomplished tabala and harmonium player.
He was equally at ease with the thumri, dadra and ghazal forms.
These find their origins in countries like Iran and Afghanistan.
He had picked up the original style and nuances of the thumri and ghazal while studying at Lahore.
He also learnt quite a bit of Urdu to elevate his ghazal performances.
Another area of music where he made his mark was Marathi Natyasangeet.
Out of these, Katyaar Kaaljaat Ghusli became highly popular.
Vasantrao became the cynosure of everyones eye for his challenging role of Khan Aftaab Hussain Khansaheb.
As the plays popularity began to soar, he acquired the alias, Pandit Vasantkhan Deshpande.
He acted in movies like Kaaliya Mardan, Dudh Bhaat, Ashtavinayak and many more.
He gave playback to more than 80 Marathi films.
This is how he presented his brainchild, his tour de force, Marathi Natyasageetachi Vaatchaal.
The concert was first held in Delhi.
It stretched for 3 days, 6 hours each day.
The experiment was bound to be a winner with the audience.
He was a thinker and he blended these styles to develop a style of his own.
He did not believe in imitation.
Considering the timbre of his voice, pitch, range and expressive capacity, he forged his own characteristic style.
His development of the khayal was always full of such tensions and releases, which pleased the audience.
He had an equal command of both common and uncommon Ragas and a large repertoire of compositions.
He presented them judiciously, considering the type of audience before him.
Dr. Vasantrao Deshpande was an academic, earning himself a PhD in The Transformation of Hindustani Classical Music.
He was also invited to several educational institutions to deliver lectures on music, quite often with live demonstrations.
Vasantrao has had several commercial releases under his name.
Vasantrao also conceived Raga Raj Kalyan, a Yaman variant with Pancham dropped altogether.
Katyaar Kaaljaat Ghusli was a successful play in his carrier.
His grand son Rahul Deshpande is a classical singer and he is carrying his style further.
He has trained under Gangadharbua Pimpalkhare, Usha Chipalkatti and Mukul Shivputra, son of Kumar Gandharva.
The three-day festival is held in the month of January each year.
Noted classical musicians and performers take part the festival.
During the festival, two awards, the Vasantotsav Youth Award for Promising artists and Vasantotsav Award for veteran artists are given.
Kesarbai Kerkar was an Indian classical vocalist of the Jaipur-Atrauli gharana.
Upon her return to Goa, she studied with the vocalist Ramkrishnabuwa Vaze.
She belongs to Gomantak Maratha Samaj.
Kerkar eventually achieved wide renown, performing regularly for aristocratic audiences.
Indian Nobel laureate Rabindranath Tagore is said to have been very fond of Kerkars singing.
Nikhil Ranjan Banerjee was an eminent Indian classical sitarist of the Maihar Gharana.
A student of the legendary Baba Allauddin Khan, Pandit Nikhil Banerjee was known for his technical virtuosity and clinical execution.
Early life and background.
Nikhil Banerjee was born on October 14, 1931 in Calcutta into a Brahmin family.
His father, Jitendranath Banerjee, was an amateur sitarist and Banerjee was fascinated by his fathers playing.
At the age of five, however, they relented and he acquired a small sitar, initially learning under his father.
Banerjee grew into a child prodigy.
He won an All-India sitar competition and became the youngest musician employed by All India Radio at the age of nine.
Instead Birendra Kishore Roy Chowdhury, the zamindar of Gouripur in present-day Bangladesh, became responsible for much of his early training.
Amir Khan continued to have a significant influence on Banerjees musical development.
The Maihar Years.
In 1947 Banerjee met Ustad Allauddin Khan, who was to become his main guru along with his son, Ali Akbar Khan.
Both were sarod players.
Banerjee went to Allauddin Khans concerts and was desperate to have him as his teacher.
The discipline under Ustad Allauddin Khan was legendary.
For years, Nikhils practice would start at four in the morning and, with few breaks, continue to eleven oclock at night.
He was also well known for adjusting his teaching to his particular students strengths and weaknesses.
Consequently, under his teaching, Shankar and Banerjee developed different sitar styles.
All through his life he kept taking lessons from Ustad Allauddin Khan and his children, Ustad Ali Akbar Khan and Smt.
Even so, in 1968, he was decorated with the Padma Shri, and in 1974 received the prestigious Sangeet Natak Akademi Award.
Nikhil Banerjee frequently toured Europe and the USA, with prominent tabla players including Swapan Chaudhuri and Anindo Chatterjee.
Nevertheless, a number of prominent sitarists have been influenced by his teaching and distinctive style.
Many of his unpublished concert recordings are available which are testimony to his musical thought.
Nikhil Banerjee was in failing health through the 80s, having survived three heart attacks.
At the time of his death, he was a faculty member at the Ali Akbar College of Music in Calcutta.
He was posthumously awarded the Padma Bhushan title by the Government of India in the same year as his death.
He is survived by his wife Roma and two daughters.
His elder daughter is married into the Tagore family.
His younger daughter Debdutta/Arya is a model and actress in Kolkata.
Inspiration and critical acclaim.
For Banerjee, music-making was a spiritual rather than a worldly path :.
Nikhil Banerjee is revered for his mastery in both melodic and rhythmic aspects of Indian music.
His unique style of sitar playing is considered to have completeness, emotion and depth.
His interpretation of ragas was usually traditional, although he is credited with creating at least two new ragas.
According to The San Francisco Chronicle, Banerjees.
technique is a phenomenon, faster than cheetahs, more secure than the dollar.
Music And Musicians observed that his improvisations always sound completely natural and spontaneous.
The following is a summary of some recent CD issues.
A more comprehensive discography can be found in the external links.
Banerjees technique is a phenomenon, faster than cheetahs, more secure than the dollar.
But he does not lean on that as most players do.
It is there, at the ready, a strength to be called on when needed.
It is his gentle playing that is so singular.
The ease of it, highlighted by atypical bits of literal reiteration create a kind of euphoric effect.
The result is remarkably individual.
One could spot a Banerjee performance on a radio broadcast or tape, a thing of great difficulty among Oriental musicians.
Pandit Tarun Bhattacharya is an Indian classical musician who plays the santoor, a type of hammered dulcimer.
He has learnt from Ravi Shankar.
Ravi Shankar accepted young Tarun as his only disciple on Santoor of the Maihar Gharana.
The mesmerized list of admirers include Prince Charles, George Harrison, Paolo Solaris and many more of respected figures across the Globe.
The champion maestro changed the art of playing santoor for ever.
His improvisations on the shape and string arrangements have resulted in deeper and more classical sound for the Santoor.
His Santoor thrills all his listener transcending countries, cultures, gender, religions and age.
Maestro Tarun Bhattacharya has released over 100 CDs and Cassettes.
AWARDS & CITATIONS.
Best Critic Award - Germany.
Pre Grammy Nomination-1997.
Excellence in World Music from Music of the World - USA.
Mahakal Samman - Madhya Pradesh., India.
Surrender Paul Award - Kolkata, India.
Bhakti Kala Khetra Award - Iskcon, India.
Jadu Bhatt Award - Kolkata, India.
Monmohan Bhatt Special Achievement Award - New Delhi, India.
Vishnu Pad Alankaran Samman - Gaya, India.
39th Bhaskar Rao Music Festival Felicitation - Chandigarh, India.
Felicitation at Schweinfurt Rotary Club - Germany.
Vocational Excellence Award - Rotary International District 3291, India.
Sutanati Parishad Felicitation - Calcutta, India.
Rotary Peace & Goodwill Ambassador - Rotary Club of Calcutta Metro City.
Felicitation at National University, USA.
Felicitation at University of North Texas, USA.
Felicitation at Harvard University.
Felicitation at MIT, Boston, USA.
Felicitation at Browning University, Boston, USA.
Felicitation at Duke University, USA.
Felicitation at North CarolinaUniversity, USA.
Felicitation at University of Virginia, USA.
Felicitation at Illinois University, USA.
Felicitation at Yale University, USA.
Felicitation at University of Champagne, USA.
Tarun Bhattacharya is a visionary who prefers to call his instrument Shata Tantri Veena, the original Vedic name.
Tarun Bhattacharya strongly believes that Indian Classical Music is like a therapeutic drug.
Despite financial constraints Pt Tarun Bhattacharya continuously strives to develop and shape young, promising classical music careers.
Dr Kalyani Bondre is an academic and Indian classical vocalist.
Kalyani Bondre was born in Pune, India, into a musical family.
She received initial guidance in music from her parents, both musicians in their own right.
Kalyani trained in vocal classical music earlier under Ranjana Bhide, disciple of Pandit Gangadharbuwa Pimpalkhare.
Bondre holds a Ph.D. in Economics from the University of Pune.
and member of management department from jaipur.
Kalyani specializes in Hindustani Classical Music and Marathi Natyasangeet.
She also presents other forms like Bhaavgeet, ghazals, devotional music like bhajans and abhangas as well as fusion music.
Ustad Imdad Khan was a sitar and surbahar player.
Early life and career.
Imdad Khan was also trained by the legendary beenkar Bande Ali Khan.
Imdad instead evolved a style based on the newer, more popular khyal singing.
When he moved with his family to Kolkata, the house in which they lived was named Riyaz.
The Imdad Khan family is of Rajput lineage.
The family is of Hindu origin and later converted to Islam.
In an informal continuation of his rajput lineage Ustad Enayat Khan kept a Hindu name of Nath Singh.
Ustad Vilayat Khan himself composed many bandishes using the pen name Nath Piya.
Pandit Mukul Shivputra is a Hindustani Classical vocalist of the Gwalior Gharana and the son and foremost disciple of Pt.
Early life and training.
Born in Bhopal to Bhanumati Komkalimath and Pt.
Kumar Gandharva, Pt.
Shivputra took to musical training early on from his father.
He continued his musical education in Dhrupad and Dhamar with Pt.
K. G. Ginde and in Carnatic Music with M. D. Ramanathan.
Since his teens, Pt.
Shivputra regularly accompanied his father on Tanpura for vocal support.
In 1975, Pt.
Since his wifes death, Pt.
Shivputra has performed infrequently and irregularly in the public, which most attribute to his drug addictions and alcoholism.
Shivputra lost his wife after the birth of their son, Bhuvanesh Komkalimath who himself is a vocalist.
Pt Mukul Shivputra has been treated for addiction at Indore Deaddiction Clinic.
He currently lives in Pune and is quite back to a normal life.
Inspiration for his Music.
As per the interview He is convinced that he can realise the truth of a raga the way his elders realised.
A raga itself is a means to salvation for a vocalist, he believes.
And he lives what he realises.
Shivkumar Sharma is an Indian Santoor player.
The Santoor is a folk instrument from Kashmir and Jammu.
Sharma is often referred to by the title Pandit.
He was born in Jammu to the singer Uma Dutt Sharma and his mother tongue is Dogri.
His father started teaching him vocals and tabla when he was just five.
So he started learning santoor at the age of thirteen, and made his fathers dream come true.
He gave his first public performance in Bombay in 1955.
Shivkumar Sharma is the master instrumentalist of the Santoor, after some years as a vocalist.
He is credited with making the Santoor a popular Classical Instrument.
He composed the background music for one of the scenes in Shantaram s Jhanak Jhanak Payal Baje in 1956.
He recorded his first solo album in 1960.
He has composed music for many Hindi films in collaboration with Hariprasad Chaurasia starting with Silsila.
They came to be known as the Shiv-Hari music duo.
Some of the movies they composed music for that were big musical hits are Faasle, Chandni, Lamhe and Darr.
Sharma married Manorama and has two sons.
His son, Rahul, is also a Santoor Player and they have performed together since 1996.
Dildar Hussain is a percussionist Tabla master.
He worked and toured with Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan.
Teacher : Utd.
Dildar Hussain was the percussionist of Ustad Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan s Qawwali party until Nusrats death in 1997.
Dildar Hussain learned tabla from Ustad Allah Rakha Khan.
His first performance was in India in 1969 before he joined Ustad Nusrat Fateh Ali Khans Qawwali party in 1971.
Along with Farrukh Fateh Ali Khan, Nusrats brother, Dildar had been a member of the party since its formation.
With incredible skill as a tabla master, Ustad Dildar now carries the tradition on with his sons.
His eldest leading the party Abrar and his youngest Israr sitting in the seat, like his father as tabla player.
Now Dildar is an amazing composer, singer and harmonium player.
Dildar teaches and performs internationally with his students Yasar Hussain in Denmark and Aminah Chishti in the US.
This unique style is known to be over 1000 year old created by the great Amir Khusro.
Rare to see even in Pakistan.
Created with the intention to carry sound acoustically.
Ustad has also toured and can sometimes be seen accompanying Rahat Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan.
Patrick Moutal is a French sitarist and musicologist.
He has been teaching north Indian classical music at the Paris Conservatoire since 1984.
Born in Lyon in 1951, he went to India at age 18 in order to study Hindustani classical music.
He learned Hindi and settled in Banaras, where he stayed for 14 years.
In 1970, he was admitted as a sitar student at the Faculty of Performing Arts of Banaras Hindu University.
Under the guidance of Dr K.C. Gangrade and Pt Lalmani Misra, he completed the following degrees :.
- Diploma 1973.
- Bachelors Degree with Gold Medal in 1976.
- Masters Degree with Omkarnath Thakur Prize in 1978.
- Masters Degree in French language in 1979.
- Doctorate of Performance & Compositions in 1983.
The year of his doctorate, he wrote two books in English about ragas.
From 1977 to 1983, he performed regularly at All India Radio.
Since then, he has been dedicated to promoting Indian musical culture.
In 2000, he developed a website, Hindustani Raga Sangeet Online, devoted to Indian vocalists and instrumentalists through rare archives.
Hindustani Gata-s Compilation.
Instrumental themes in north Indian classical music Patrick Moutal Publisher ISBN 978-2-9541244-1-4.
Comparative Study of Selected Hindustani Ragas.
Volume 1 ISBN 978-2-9541244-2-1.
Hindustani Raga Index.
Major bibliographical references on north Indian Raga-s ISBN 978-2-9541244-3-8.
Hindustani Raga Sangita.
Mecanismes de base de la musique de lInde du Nord, 2e edition revue et augmentee Patrick Moutal Editeur ISBN 978-2-9541244-0-7.
Sur la musique indienne et son enseignement, Musiques a prendre, CENAM, 1984.
La musique indienne : etre confronte a linfini.
Interview de Patrick MOUTAL par Jean-Louis MAINGALON, Art Press No. 95, septembre 1985.
La formation du musicien classique de lInde.
Quel enseignement musical pour demain ?.
, 2-La formation du musicien professionnel, Actes et demarches.
Les documents de lInstitut de Pedagogie Musicale, IPM, Villette, juin 1986.
Linterpretation dans la musique indienne, Analyse Musicale No. 7, 2deg trimestre 1987.
Quand ca improvise dans un carcan indien, Marsyas No. 11, La crampe, septembre 1989.
Lecrit et la notation musicale : degre de representativite, Analyse Musicale, Notation et analyse, No. 24, juin 1991.
Musique indienne Porte de Pantin.
Jean-Charles RICHARD, Marsyas, Apprentissage et traditions, No. 31, septembre 1994.
Georges Luneau, Fenetre sur ..., 1979.
Dover Lane Music Conference.
The festival had humble beginnings in 1952.
Music lovers from the by-lanes of Kolkata used to gather in order to appreciate Indian classical music recitals.
Over time, the festival has undergone many changes.
Many stalwarts of Indian classical music have performed at the festival.
Venue and dates.
Instead of the original venue on Dover Lane, this annual event is now organized in the Nazrul Mancha on Southern Avenue.
The office of the organizing body is still at 18/2 Dover Lane.
The festival is usually held between the 22nd and the 25th of January.
The festival lasts for four days every year.
Apart from established musicians, youngsters are also encouraged to participate and display their talent.
Performances begin late in the evening and go on all night long till the next morning.
The festival draws large crowds every year.
Its tickets are sold out within days of them being made available.
It has become one of the most important cultural events of the year.
The festival boasts performances by a number of eminent musicians from all over the country.
Veena Sahasrabuddhe is a leading Indian vocalist and composer of Hindustani classical music.
Her singing style has its roots in Gwalior gharana, but it also borrows from Jaipur and Kirana gharanas.
Veena is known as a singer of khyal and bhajan.
Veena was born in a musical family.
Her father Shankar Shripad Bodas was a disciple of vocalist Pandit Vishnu Digambar Paluskar.
She began her early musical education under her father, and then under her brother Kashinath Shankar Bodas.
She also learned Kathak dancing in her childhood.
Veenas musical mentors include Padmashri Balwantrai Bhatt, Pandit Vasant Thakar, and Pandit Gajananrao Joshi.
A.B.G.M.V. Mandal conferred on her a doctorate in vocal music in 1988.
She was the Head of the Department of Music at SNDT Pune campus.
Veena has given musical performances in India, Australia, Europe, the Middle East, and North America.
Biographical Information :.
Hinduonnet.com, by Mala Kumar.
Call of the Valley.
Call of the Valley is a 1967 Hindustani classical music album by Hariprasad Chaurasia, Brij Bhushan Kabra, and Shivkumar Sharma.
It was recorded for the label EMI.
The instrumental album follows a day in the life of an Indian shepherd from Kashmir.
It is one of the most successful Indian albums and one that became popular with an international audience.
It was very important in introducing Indian music to Western ears and internationally the best selling Indian music record.
George Harrison, David Crosby, Paul McCartney, Bob Dylan and Roger McGuinn are fans of the album.
The atmospheric music is traditional, but the innovative use of guitar and flute make the sound more acceptable for Western audiences.
Kabra plays slide guitar, Sharma santoor, Chaurasia bansuri and Tabla was played by Manikrao Popatkar.
The artists became well known musicians and the instruments they used became acceptable in traditional Indian music.
Today Call of the Valley is considered a classic and a milestone in world music.
Allmusic advises : If the newcomer buys only one Indian classical recording, it should be Call of the Valley.
The remastered edition has three bonus tracks.
It is listed in the book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die by Robert Dimery and Michael Lydon.
Ahir Bhairav/Nat Bhairav.
Nachiketa Yakkundi is a Hindustani Classical vocalist in the San Francisco Bay Area.
Born in Dharwad, Karnataka, Shri Nachiketa Yakkundi was initiated into Hindustani classical vocal music by his parents.
His formal study began in Madras under Shri B. N. Simha and later under Shri B. Hanumantachar.
His rigorous and extended pedagogy came under the virtuoso, late Padmabhushan Pandit Basavraj Rajguru.
Nachiketa has extensively performed in cities across India and the North America.
Nachiketa Yakkundi is also a senior teacher at the Sangeetaanjali College of Music.
Nachiketa Yakkundi is a regular on local Bay Area TV introducing and demonstrating Hindustani Classical music to viewers.
Pandit Uday Bhawalkar is an Indian Hindustani vocalist.
He is an exponent of the dhrupad genre.
Uday Bhawalkar was born in Ujjain, Madhya Pradesh.
He is the youngest of three siblings.
He began training in Hindustani classical music from his elder sister.
At the age of 15, he received scholarship at the Dhrupad Kendra, Bhopal.
In 1987, delighted by Udays first public performance, Ustad Nasir Aminuddin Dagar awarded him a gold medal.
Since then he has performed widely in India and abroad, in concerts, workshops and lecture - demonstration sessions.
Based in Pune, he regularly performs on National TV and radio in India.
Uday began teaching at the age of 20.
He gives workshops in London every year at the Asian Music Circuit.
He is also one of the gurus at ITC SRA, Kolkata.
The Veena Foundation.
Chandrakant Sardeshmukh was a Hindustani classical sitar player of the Maihar Gharana.
He was taught by Ustad Shabuddin Khan and Khurshid Mirajkar from the age of 4, and became popular as child artist.
He performed in the famous Sawai Gandharva Music Festival in Pune in 1963.
Since then till 1976 he learnt with both Pandit Ravi Shankar and his then wife Annapurna Devi.
In 1976 he was awarded Sangeet Vibhushan by University of Rajasthan.
He did a Ph. D. in Samavedic Basis of Indian Music from University of Poona.
He has a Knowledge and background of Ayurveda from his father.
He does extensive research in Healing Music and has given several Healing Music sessions to individuals and groups.
He has toured around the world extensively, giving concerts in India, Germany Australia, Japan and the USA from 1982.
He has recorded traditional Indian music as well as experimented with several western and Japanese musicians.
Chandrakant Sardeshmukh died in a car accident near Solapur on 15 August 2011.
Zakir Hussain, , is an Indian tabla player, musical producer, film actor and composer.
He was awarded the Padma Shri in 1988, and Padma Bhushan in 2002, by Government of India.
Early life and education.
Hussain was born in Mumbai, India to the legendary tabla player Alla Rakha.
He attended St. Michaels High School in Mahim, and graduated from St Xaviers, Mumbai.
Hussain was a child prodigy, and was touring by the age of twelve.
He went to the United States in 1970, beginning his international career which includes more than 150 concert dates a year.
Hussain is a founding member of Bill Laswell s World Music Supergroup Tabla Beat Science.
Zakir Hussain married Antonia Minnecola, a Kathak dancer and teacher, who is also his manager.
They have two daughters, Anisa Qureshi and Isabella Qureshi.
Anisa graduated from UCLA and is trying her hand in video production and film making.
Isabella is studying dance major in Manhattan.
He was also a visiting professor at Stanford University.
He now resides in San Francisco.
Antara is the equivalent of a verse in Hindustani classical music.
Suphala is a tabla artist, composer, and producer.
She is a protege of tabla players Ustad Alla Rakha and Zakir Hussain and is based in New York City.
Born in the United States by Indian immigrant parents, Suphala has studied music in India.
She is trained in both Indian and Western classical music, and has studied piano since the age of four.
In January 2005, Suphala was the first artist to perform in Afghanistan after the fall of the Taliban.
She is the daughter of Suhas V. Patankar, a pioneer in the field of computational fluid dynamics.
Instru Mental, Suphalas first album, was released in September 2000.
Arnab Chakrabarty is a Hindustani classical musician and sarod player.
Early life and education.
Arnab Chakrabarty grew up in Mumbai, where his father was a professor of chemistry at the Indian Institute of Technology.
Arnab subsequently trained under Pandit Buddhadev Das Gupta of the Shahjahanpur Gharana.
Subsequent tutelage and influences.
Arnab continues an extended period of part-tutelage part-collaboration with Vinayak Chittar of this Gharana.
He has also studied with a number of vocalists of the Agra and Gwalior Gharanas, notably Pandit Yeshwantbua Joshi.
Arnab had reverted to training under a master of the Shahjahanpur Gharana, Prof Kalyan Mukherjea, until Mukherjeas death in March 2010.
Arnab has had several significant concerts.
Kamala Bose was a prominent Indian classical vocalist.
Kamala Bose was an eminent vocalist in Hindustani Classical music based in Allahabad.
In 1969, she came under the tutelage of the renowned vocalist, musicologist and teacher, Pt.
Ramashray Jha of the Bhatt Gharana.
In 1977, she completed her Masters Degree from the Allahabad University, in Allahabad with a distinction in Music Vocal.
She specialized in classical vocal or the khayal form, light classical i.e. Thumri, Dadra, Chaiti, Hori, Kajari etc., with great finesse.
Bose commenced her musical journey in 1970 with All India Radio, Allahabad as an A grade artist of classical vocal music.
Subsequently, she was appointed as a panellist in the Audition Board by The Director General, A.I.R, New Delhi.
Boses proscenium experience was wide and impressive.
Through them she unravelled and simplified both the basics as well as the complex aspects in the development of the ragas.
She successfully conducted many workshops and lecture cum demo sessions prominent among which are :.
Kamala was married to Sri.
Bichitra Mohan Bose and they have one son named Jayanto Bose and two daughters named Nabonita Mitra and JoitaBoseMandal.
The Italian TV in 1998 and Swiss National Radio in 1999 have also recorded her.
Nandi Records released her first CD titled Reverberation in 1998.
Kamala Bose, a well-known disciple of renowned musicologist, Pandit Ramashreya Jha.
Renowned sitar player Gaurav Mazumdar, a disciple of Kamala Bose.
Kamala Bose, All india Radio Archives.
Performance at All India Radios National Program, April 20, 2008.
Surmani Kamala Bose - Raga Chandrakauns.
Jnan Prakash Ghosh.
Pandit Jnan Prakash Ghosh was an Indian tabla player from Farukhabad gharana of Hindustani classical music and musicologist.
This was followed by the Padma Bhushan in 1984, given by the Government of India.
Early life and background.
Born in a Hindu family with musical background in Kolkata.
He graduated from the Scottish Church College of the University of Calcutta He was keen in sports.
He also practised painting, but had to discontinue these due to an eye injury in a soccer match.
Then he turned to music.
He was trained in vocals by Girija Shankar, Mohammed Sagir Khan and Mohammed Dabir Khan.
He worked for 15 years in All India Radio as a producer of music.
He wrote pieces in classical music, light music, modern, orchestral, choral, and percussion styles.
He took part in valuable discussions, talks and interviews in Hindi, Bengali and English.
He also began the  Ramayangeeti  a fusion of traditional and modern Indian music.
Pandit Ghosh was the founder of Sourav Academy of Music and closely associated with the Sangeet Research Academy.
He scored music for many Bengali films, Jadubhatta, Andhare Alo and Rajlakshmi o Srikanta are worth mentioning.
He has composed and directed music to a number of popular gramophone records sung by various artistes.
One of his outstanding compositions was called Chaturang - involving tabla, pakhawaj, kathak and tarana.
Awards and recognition.
Sangeet Natak Akademi Fellowship in 1974, Padma Bhushan in 1984.
Ustad Nasiruddin Badeji Khan was a Hindustani Classical vocalist of the Jaipur-Atrauli Gharana founded by his father, Utd.
Badeji Khan was the first son and child of Utd.
Until his late teens, Utd.
Badeji Khan lead his younger brothers Utd.
Manji Khan and Utd.
Shamsuddin Bhurji Khan in receiving the tutelage of their father, Utd.
Alladiya Khan, being his fathers most prospective student.
He was called Badeji because he was the eldest of his siblings.
Health and training.
Badeji Khan was not able to complete his musical tutelage due to health ailments related to Cricket.
Because of health cautions, Utd.
Badeji completely bandoned music until his mid-adulthood.
In his mid-thirties, Utd.
Badeji Khan continued learning music briefly from his cousin, Utd.
Natthan Khan once his health began to strengthen.
Badeji Khan then took to learning music from musicians of the Gwalior Gharana.
Unlike his more successful brothers, Utd.
Badeji Khan did not produce notable disciples.
Bhurji Khans son, Baba Azizuddin Khan has taken the task of writing the rare compositions in Utd.
Badeji Khans repertoire.
Badeji Khan died in 1937 of natural causes.
Like his famous father, Utd.
Badeji Khan did not leave behind any recordings.
Hafiz Ali Khan.
Haafiz Ali Khan was an Indian Sarod player.
He was a tall figure in twentieth-century sarod music.
Early life and background.
He later took lessons from his cousin Abdulla Khan, nephew Mohammad Amir Khan, and finally the beenkar Wazir Khan of Rampur.
Ustad Wazir Khan was a direct descendant of the legendary Tansen, through the lineage of the latters daughter.
Notably, Allauddin Khan of Maihar was also a pupil of Wazir Khan in Rampur in the same period.
It said that Khansahib later studied dhrupad and thumri with Ganeshilal Mishra and Bhaiya Ganpatrao, respectively.
Old-timers who have seen him in concert recall his stage presence and musicianship with reverence and awe.
Haafiz Ali Khan died in 1972, at the age of 84 in New Delhi.
Sheila Dikshit on 10 February at PWD Road.
This is the 2nd entry road to Nizamuddin Railway Station.
This is the only road named after an artist after Tansen and Thyagaraja in the capital city.
This road is about 300 metres long.
His live performance combines Kirtan chanting, American music, world beat rhythms and raga scales.
He sings in both English and Sanskrit, and plays guitar, sarod, harmonium, saz and percussion.
In 1994, at the age of 30, Wynne took up Indian music and yoga, changing the direction of his music.
He appeared on the first album of Krishna Das, Pilgrim Heart, who is known for popularising kirtan music in the West.
This album also featured Sting.
Paris released his debut album, Ghandarva Cafe in 2004, which was followed by Emptiness and Ecstasy and Omspun, featuring Groovananda, in.
On May 14, 2010, he and Groovananda were part of a benefit in Washington, D.C. for the Bonobo Conservation Initiative.
They have produced a single, Tara Om, with Krishna Das, and one CD, Omspun, released in 2011, both by Auspician Records.
Zohrabai Agrewali was one of the most noted and influential singers of Hindustani Classical Music from the early 1900s.
Along with Gauhar Jan, she marks the dying phase of the courtesan singing tradition in Indian classical music.
She is known for her macho style of singing.
Early life and background.
She belonged to the Agra gharana.
She was trained by Ustad Sher Khan, Ustad Kallan Khan and the noted composer Mehboob Khan.
She recorded over 60 songs during 1908-1911.
In 1994, her 18 most famous songs were reissued on one audiotape followed by a compact disc in 2003.
Dayal Thakur is an Indian classical singer in the North Indian Hindustani music tradition.
He is a dedicated proponent of the Patiala Gharana of vocal music, in the lineage of Bade Ghulam Ali Khan.
Early life and background.
Dayal Thakur was born in Mumbai, India.
He received his formal initial training in Calcutta from his Ustad Munawar Ali Khan.
He is an accomplished singer, famous for his distinctive style of Ghazals, Thumris and Khayals.
He provided vocals for her album Up !.
One of Dayal Thakur 's fortes is his ability to communicate his knowledge, making him an excellent teacher.
He currently lives in Bombay with his wife and children.
The alap is the opening section of a typical North Indian classical performance.
It is a form of melodic improvisation that introduces and develops a raga.
In dhrupad singing the alap is unmetered, improvised and unaccompanied, and started at a slow tempo.
In such cases, the first reach into a new octave can be a powerful event.
Several musicologists have proposed much more complicated classifications and descriptions of alap.
Other authorities have forwarded other classifications.
Satish Vyas is an Indian santoor player.
He is the son of the Indian classical singer C. R. Vyas.
From 1978 he studied santoor with Shivkumar Sharma.
Irshad Khan is a surbahar and sitar player based in Canada.
He is the second son of Ustad Imrat Khan.
He performs pure classical, folk, worldbeat, and new age music.
Having emerged as a child prodigy, Irshad Khan gave his first public performance at the age of seven.
His international debut was at the Queen Elizabeth Hall in London, England when he was only 13.
Irshad Khan is the founder / president of Universal Academy for Musicians, based in Mississauga and Mumbai.
Apart from actively performing internationally, he also conducts workshops, lectures and master classes in various educational institutions.
He has many commercial recordings, which are sold worldwide.
It comes after alaap and precedes jhala, the climax.
Jor is the instrumental equivalent of nomtom in the dhrupad vocal style of Indian music.
Both have a simple pulse but no well-defined rhythmic cycle.
Nishat Khan is an Indian sitar player and son of surbahar player Imrat Khan.
Khan was born in the mid-1960s in Kolkata.
He performed with musicians of the genres jazz, Gregorian chant, flamenco and Western classical music.
In August 2002, Khan performed for the Diet of Japan in Tokyo and played in 2004 at the Crossroads Guitar Festival.
Khan is based in Beverly Hills, California, and works as a visiting professor at the University of California, Los Angeles.
Pandit Vidyadhar Vyas is an Indian Hindustani vocalist, and a contemporary exponent of the Paluskar style of North Indian classical singing.
He belongs to the Gwalior gharana and the lineage of Sangeet Maharshi Pandit Vishnu Digambar Paluskar contributed to his background.
Early life and background.
Vidyadhar Vyas was born in Maharashtra to Gayanacharya Pandit Narayanrao Vyas, a disciple of Pandit Paluskar.
He was training in the Hindustani music arts of khayal, tarana and bhajan gayaki by his renowned father.
Pandit Vyas also excels in conducting lecture demonstrations, which are both enlightening and entertaining.
In addition to being a performing artist, Vidyadhar Vyas is known as a teacher.
He has been teaching and mentoring students at undergraduate and postgraduate levels since 1964 and doctorate level since 1972.
In 1973 he became Principal of the Government Music College at Jaipur.
In 1984 he became Head of the Department of Music, University of Mumbai.
In August 2007 he took over as Executive Director of ITC Sangeet Research Academy, Kolkata.
Vyas was awarded the Sangeet Natak Akademi Award in 2007.
Samson Kehimkar was a Jewish violinist and sitar player from India.
One of the pioneers of ethnic and world music in Israel.
Before emigrating in 1976, he played in Indian classical orchestras, film and pop bands.
One of the founding members of Habrera Hativit.
Shlomo Bar considered Kehimkar to be his mentor, both musically and otherwise.
He died in 2007, after battling severe diabetes for years, in the course of which both legs were amputated.
His son, the cricketer Benzi Kehimkar, died shortly after.
The Patiala gharana is one of the most prominent gharanas of vocal Hindustani classical music.
It was initially sponsored by the Maharaja of Patiala, Punjab, which was famous for ghazal, thumri, and khyal.
The Patiala Gharana was founded by Ustad Fateh Ali Khan and Ustad Ali Baksh Khan.
The Patiala gharana tends to favor pentatonic ragas for their ornamentation and execution of intricate taans.
Ektaal and Teentaal are the most common taals chosen by members of this gharana.
Besides khyal, thumri singing is emphasized.
Shankar Family & Friends.
Background and recording.
Starr, Preston, Voormann and Hopkins would all contribute to Shankar Family & Friends over the next couple of months.
It was numbered Dark Horse 22002, being the new labels second release, after Splinter s The Place I Love.
Dark Horse Records is proud to present his new music.
The album cover consists of a group photograph taken at A&M ; Studios that highlights the albums East-meets-West theme.
Shankar concedes that such an approach was a strange way of doing things, not to mention expensive.
Surprisingly, the ballet does not appear to have ever been performed in its entirety.
The best-known songs are the single and Dispute & Violence, on which Emil Richards and Tom Scott star.
All songs by Ravi Shankar, except where noted.
Dream, Nightmare & Dawn.
Patrayani Seetharama Sastry.
Patrayani Seetharama Sastry was singer, teacher and music composer of Andhra Pradesh, India.
He was also known as Saluru China Guruvu.
He was the son and disciple of Patrayani Venkata Narasimha Sastry.
He spent his early life in Berhampur and gave first performance in a temple and won gold medal.
He has composed about 30 kritis.
Two of his kritis, Iha para saadhaname - Smruti ranjani and Naada nanda mura - Mukhari are popular.
He taught many singers in Vizianagaram Music college from 1936, when Dwaram Venkataswamy Naidu was the principal.
He used to argue against the traditionalists that Harmonium is also suitable music instrument to Carnatic music.
He was teacher of Ghantasala Venkateswara Rao, the famous singer and music director of Telugu film industry.
Patrayani Seetharama Sastry Music and Dance School was established in Salur.
His son Patrayani Sangeetha Rao is a music director.
Hiren Roy was for many years considered to be the best sitar maker in India.
Many great musicians, including Nikhil Banerjee, Vilayat Khan, Annapurna Devi, and Ravi Shankar, have sworn by his creations.
Born in Bangladesh in 1920, Roy went to Kolkata at the age of 12 to learn the art of sitar playing.
He started making his own sitars and soon found that local musicians praised his work.
For his lifetime achievements, Roy was honoured in 1971 by the cultural forum called Nikkon in Kolkata.
In the 1980s, he was selected by Vishwabharati University as a member of their interview board.
Roy died in December 1992, but his tradition has been carried on by his sons.
Oldest son Himangshu ran the business until his own early demise in 1997.
Fourth son Amit pursued a career as a sitarist, leaving the shop to now be run by third son Barun.
The Hiren Roy shop also produces other Indian instruments, including the surbahar and tanpura.
Raju Ananthaswamy was a music composer and director.
He worked on Sugama Sangeetha for more than 15 years.
He was the son of vocalist Mysore Ananthaswamy.
He died in 2009, at the age of 39.
Raju Ananthaswamy displayed musical aptitude from a young age and began playing tabla in his father 's troupe.
In addition to tabla, he could play a variety of other musical instruments including the guitar, mandolin and keyboard.
Raju 's compositions and singing style was unique as well as greatly influenced by his father, late Mysore Ananthaswamy.
He was well known for his songs Yaava mohana murali kareyitu from America America and Hottare yedbittu from the movie, Rishi.
He performed with his troupe all year round.
He used to set aside his weekends to teach sugama sangeetha to several students.
He is survived by his mother Shanta Ananthaswamy and three sisters.
Raju Ananthaswamy has been the most talented singer in recent times.
His death is a real loss to the Kannada music world.
He has died at a young age, but has left behind a pool of great music compositions.
His genius was not fully exploited, said C. Aswath, veteran music director.
Ananthaswamy 's death came as a massive shock to Kannada film and music fraternity.
Raju Ananthaswamy has left behind a pool of great music compositions.
His genius was not fully exploited,  said C Ashwath, Late veteran music director.
He will be remembered for his creativity and sense of humour.
Raju 's biggest film music success, the memorable Yaava Mohana Murali Kareyithu came in Chandrashekars film America America.
As a singer he was the best and most of his music compositions were top class.
I sung most of his music compositions.
Syahi is usually black in colour, circular in shape and is made of a mixture of flour, water and iron filings.
Originally, syahi was a temporary application of flour and water.
Over time it has evolved into a permanent addition.
Syahi functions by loading only a portion of the stretched skin with weight.
In the higher-pitched drum this has the effect of altering the resonance frequency of some lower order vibrations more than others.
The action on the left hand drum is a little different.
On other side, its position is offset and serves simply to lower the resonance frequency.
The application of the syahi is very involved.
Not all of the layers are the same size.
But the final product is expected to exhibit a specific shape.
The stone abrasion is crucial to creating the syahi.
Producing the latticework.
Once the syahi is semi-hardened and not yet dry, the rubbing with the stone begins.
The rubbing continues till it removes the spikes and a coarse surface results.
On this, layers are then added in reducing concentric circles, each half to one mm thick.
Interaction with moisture results in melting of the black crystals.
This is the reason why players frequently use powder to keep the hands dry while playing.
Ronu Majumdar is a noted Indian flautist in the Hindustani Classical Music tradition.
Early life and training.
Laxman Prasad Jaipurwale at whose behest he reverted to the flute.
Pandit Vijay Raghav Rao, a music scholar, groomed Ronu into a concert flautist.
Ronus speciality is the Shank Bansuri, a of his own.
design, which adds an extra dimension at the lower scales.
Awards, nominations, and music collaborations.
In 1981, Ronu Majumdar won the first prize at the All India Radio competition, and the Presidents Gold Medal.
He has associated with Pandit Ravi Shankar in albums like Passages, and Chants of India.
He has more than 30 audio releases to his credit.
He has won prestigious Aditya Vikram Birla Award for the year 1999 for his dedication to music.
Sahara India Pariwar felicitated him with lifetime achievement award on occasion of Jyoti Diwas 2001.
He has toured extensively in Europe, the USA, Canada, Japan, Singapore, Thailand, Australia, New Zealand and the Middle East.
Majumdar is also known for a number of collaborations and jugalbandis with other leading instrumentalists.
He has also provided short training sessions to budding young artists like Raghavendran Rajasekaran from Singapore.
Ramesh Narayan is a Hindustani vocalist from Kerala in south India, and is also an acclaimed film music director.
He has given concerts in several parts of his country and abroad.
Born on 3 November 1959, Shri.
Ramesh Narayan hails from a family of Carnatic musicians settled at Kuthuparambu near Kannur, North Kerala.
He had his early lessons in music from his parents, learning Carnatic music up to the age of 20.
Moving to Pune, he learnt Sitar under the tutelage of Shri.
Satchidananda Phadke, a renowned disciple of the Sitar Maestro Pandit Ravi Shankar.
Becoming a competent Sitarist in no time, Ramesh Narayan found himself captivated by Hindustani vocal.
He joined the Akhil Bharatiya Gandharva Mahavidyalaya and took his  Visharad  with high distinction.
Pandit Jasraj trained him rigorously in the subtler aspects of music in the traditional Gurukula style.
Ramesh Narayan has accompanied Guruji at several concerts.
Blessed with a powerful and expressive voice, his renditions are noted for their depth of imagination.
He is equally at ease with the weighty and expansive Khayal or the crisp and moving Bhajan.
Ramesh Narayan is accompanied at many of his concerts by Hema, his wife and disciple.
Ramesh Narayan is also blessed with two daughters, Madhuvanti and Madhushree who also follow their fathers footsteps.
Inaugurated by Parampoojya, Guruji, Pandit.Jasraj, the institution today imparts valuable training and insights to many discerning students.
Branches exist at Kozhikode, Kochi, Thrissur in Kerala and at Coimbatore in Tamil Nadu.
The school also holds the privilege of being the only school in India associated with Mewati Gharana.
They wrote about him.
Ans : All over India.
One of my disciples Ramesh Narayan, is from Kerala, He isvery good and runs three school in Trivandrum, Ernakulam and Palghat.
The Hindu Jan. 16, 2005.
Screen Oct. 28, 1994, Mumbai.
The Week Oct, 23, 1994.
Indian Express Jan, 8, 1995, Chennai.
The Hindu Oct, 4, 1996, Kochi.
Pioneer Mar, 29, 1995, Delhi.
Srikrishna Babanrao Haldankar is an Indian classical singer, composer, and music teacher of Agra gharana of Hindustani classical music.
He is the son of painter Sawlaram Haldankar, and has won awards through his career.
and is an Adjunct Professor of Indian Music at the University of Mumbai.
He studied under Ustad Khadim Hussain of Agra gharana, who settled in Mumbai from Jaipur.
Justin Hayward is an English musician, best known as singer, songwriter and guitarist in the rock band The Moody Blues.
Hayward was born in Dean Street, Swindon, Wiltshire, England and educated at Shrivenham School, Berkshire and The Commonweal School, in Swindon.
One of Haywards early groups was All Things Bright, which opened for The Hollies and Brian Poole and the Tremeloes.
The Moody Blues.
Within a few days Hayward had replaced departing Moody Blues vocalist and guitarist Denny Laine.
Bassist John Lodge replaced temporary deputy Rod Clarke who had stood in for departed Bassist Clint Warwick at the same time.
Hayward says of Pinder : Mike and the Mellotron made my songs work.
Haywards B side song Cities being an early ecology themed item.
Nothing Changes etc.
Their album sales from 1978 to the present are more than 60 million.
Hiatus and Blue Jays / Solo Work.
In 1974, the Moody Blues decided to take what ended up being a four-year break from performing and recording.
Together, they had a hit in 1975 with Blue Guitar, and released an album titled Blue Jays.
In 1977 Hayward recorded his first solo album Songwriter.
Wayne later contributed to Haywards 1980 album Night Flight.
These tracks were later included among the Bonus tracks on a CD re-issue of his Songwriter solo album in 2004.
Classic Blue included a cover version of Led Zeppelin s hit Stairway to Heaven.
Hayward contributed vocals to a song on Rick Wakeman s 1999 album Return to the Centre of the Earth.
Hayward was later involved in a legal dispute, now resolved, arguing he was not paid for his participation on the album.
He did so again in the UK in June 2009, and appeared on the tour in November and December 2010.
In an interview, in 2005, Edge said if he remained in good health, he could go on for 10 more years.
Haywards album Spirits of the Western Sky was released on 26 February 2013 on the Eagle / Lagare International labels.
On February 26, 2013 Hayward released his solo album Spirits of the Western Sky on the Eagle Rock label.
The final show of the solo tour in Atlanta, GA was recorded for a DVD project to be released soon.
Recently he has played a Collings D3 on stage and on recordings.
Among other instruments, Hayward also played mandolin on A Question of Balance and sitar on In Search of the Lost Chord.
Ann Marie Guirron & Justin were married on 19 December 1970.
Hayward was awarded the first of numerous awards from the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers for songwriting in 1974.
In 2004, Hayward was awarded the Gold Badge for lifetime achievement by the British Academy of Songwriters, Composers and Authors.
Tanvir Ahmed Khan.
Ustad Tanveer Ahmed Khan is an Indian vocalist in the Hindustani classical tradition, from the Delhi Gharana.
He sings Khyal, Thumri, Dadra, Tappa, Tarana, Bhajans and Ghazals.
Tanveer Ahmed Khan was born into a musical family of Dilli Gharana at Mausiqui Manzil in Darya Ganj, Delhi.
He started learning classical music at the early age of 4 years from Chand Khan.
After him, he learnt from his grandfather Usman Khan and later on from his father Naseer Ahmed Khan.
He has lived in Delhi from his childhood and has done his schooling from St. James School, Munirka, New Delhi.
In 1994, he started learning from Iqbal Ahmed Khan.
Dilli Gharana and Gayaki.
Miyan Achpal Khan is the fountainhead of the Dilli Gharana.
He belonged to the lineage of Meer Hasan Samant and was son and Mureed of Bheekan Shah.
Miyan Achpal Khan was both a musician and composer of high order.
After Miyan Achpal Khan, the legacy continued with his grandson Chand Khan.
In Dilli Gharana, Gayaki is quite different from others.
The unfolding of the raga begins with nom-tom alaap followed by the vilambit khayal.
After enunciating the asthayi, the raga is elaborated with bol-alaap, after which the vocalist proceeds with the antara.
Dilli Gharana does not rigidly confine to note by note development of raga but makes judicious sortie into higher octaves.
This segment is embellished with gamak, meend, khatka, murki etc.
This style is especially known for its lachav and ghulav.
The drut khayal begins with bol-banav, i.e. artistic variation of text.
Dilli Gharana is reputed for its variety of intricate taans, which may well be called its hallmark.
Other outstanding features are the shapely amad, complex yet accurate tihaais, purity of raga and fidelity of compositions.
The student eventually masters the knowledge that the guru embodies.
The Amir Khusro Institute Of Music awarded him the title Prince of Taan.
Apratim Majumdar, is an Indian classical musician from Kolkata, India.
He plays the Sarod.
He is an internationally recognized instructor of classical Indian music.
Apratims study in Music under Rabin Ghosh continues.
Apratim also received training for a period of three years from Shree Partho Sarothy, disciple of Ustad Dhyanesh Khan and Pt.
Apratim received training for a period of three years from Shree Partho Sarothy, disciple of Ustad Dhyanesh Khan and Pt.
Presently he is under training of Dr. Pradip Kumar Chakraborty, one of the seniormost disciples of Pt.
Awarded by West Bengal State Music Akademi and The Dover Lane Music conference.
Sur Mani title conferred by Sur Singar Samsad Mumbai.
Apratim performed a number of prestigious concerts.
Apratim has also performed in Germany, France, Denmark, Switzerland, Italy, Holland, Austria and Bangladesh.
Awards and achievements.
He was awarded prizes by West Bengal State Music Akademi and The Dover Lane Music conference in the year 2000.
He received the prestigious Sur Mani title by the Sur Singar Samsad Mumbai.
He is  Sangeet Bhaskar  from Pracheen Kalakendra, Chandigarh.
Apratim has composed music for number of Short films.
He is teaching students in Guru-sishya-parampara style, doing Workshops and Lecture Demonstrations.He is also teaching online.
Bageshri is a Hindustani classical raga.
Arohana & Avarohana.
n s, g m, D n S. S n D, m p D, m g R S. Vadi & Samavadi.
Vadi : Madhyam.
Samavadi : Shadaj.
Pakad or Chalan.
D n s, m, m P D, m g R S. R P in Aaroh.
Organization & Relationships.
Related ragas : List related ragas here, making each raga a link with.
Thaat : Kafi.
The time for this raaga is madhya raatri.
List of Film Songs based on Ragas.
Pandit Sankha Chatterjee is an Indian tabla player.
He studied under three traditional Tabla Gharana in strict Parampara tradition.
Born into a musical family in Calcutta, India.
Sankha Chatterjee style is a blend of three leading Gharanas, the Farukkabad, Punjab and Delhi Gharanas.
He still performs and teaches.
He divides his time teaching in Berlin and India as his bases and holds workshops across Europe and the United States.
His daughter Sangeeta Bandopadhyay is a leading classical vocalist of the Patiala Gharana of Indian classical sangeet.
The composition in this raga appear on a total of only 2 pages from page numbers 719 to 721.
This raga appears in the Ragmala as the first ragini of Sri raga.
However, modern sources do not give Bairari nor Vairati but Barari and Varari as well as Varati are listed.
Kaufmann believes that all of these names refer to the same raga, Barari.
Whether this is the same as the old Bairari is open to question.
The possibility always exists that Bairari was a regional tune.
It was used by Guru Ram Das for six short hymns and by Guru Arjan for one.
This raga is performed during the evening and it is currently assigned to the Marva thata.
It resembles Purva Kalyan, the main difference being the use of Pa which is strong in Bairari and weak in Purva-Kalyan.
Popley places Bairari in the same group as Sri Raga and this would agree with the Ragmala.
In the Guru Granth Sahib there are 2 pages dedicated to this raga from page 719 to 721.
Kedar Naphade is an Indian harmonium player in the Hindustani classical tradition.
Kedar Naphade was born into a Maharashtrian family in the city of Mumbai, India.
His father, Sudheer Naphade is a professional in the Merchant Navy and was the Nautical Advisor to the Government of India.
His mother Pushpalata Naphade is a physician.
He grew up in a traditional middle class environment in a suburb of Mumbai.
He received initial music education and training in the harmonium from his grandfather Shri Dadasaheb Naphade and from Arwind Gajendragadkar.
Since 1980, from the age of 8, he started learning harmonium solo and accompaniment from Tulsidas Borkar.
He was also closely associated with and learnt from Padmavati Shaligram-Gokhale of the Atrauli-Jaipur Gharana from 1989-1993.
He finished his engineering degree at the Indian Institute of Technology in Mumbai in 1993.
Kedar has been performing harmonium solo and accompaniment concerts since 1982.
He first came into limelight with a concert at the prestigious Annual Alladiya Khan Smruti Samaroha in Mumbai, India with Smt.
Padmavati Shaligram-Gokhalie in 1992.
In addition to classical music, Kedar also plays the semi-classical forms of Marathi Natyasangeet, Bhajans, Thumri etc.
Kedar has performed harmonium solo and has accompanied vocalists at numerous concerts in India, Europe and in the U.S.
He has also been featured on radio stations such as the National Public Radio, WKCR 89.9, e-Prasaran Internet radio etc.
He has collaborated on stage with legendary musicians of India such as his guru Smt.
Padmavati Shaligram-Gokhale, Pt.
Veena Sahasrabuddhe, Pt.
Ulhas Kashalkar, Smt.
Prabha Atre, Smt.
Laxmi Shankar, Pt.
Phiroz Dastur, Smt.
Ashwini Bhide-Deshpande, etc.
Awards and recognitions.
Swar Sadhana Samiti young artist award.
Bandish, Cheez or Gat is a fixed, melodic composition in Hindustani vocal or instrumental music.
There are different ways of systematizing the parts of a composition.
A bandish provides the literature element in the music, for standard structured singing.
In the past many gharanas protected their bandishes from moving out of the family with gross incoherent vocal renditions.
In the realm of vocal music, it is often known as Cheez.
The word Bandish is derived from Hindi language, and literally means binding together.
Sthayi or Asthayi : The initial, Rondo phrase or line of a fixed, melodic composition.
Antara : The first body phrase or line of a fixed, melodic composition.
Sanchari : The third body phrase or line of a fixed, melodic composition, seen more typically in Dhrupad bandishes.
Aabhog : The fourth and concluding body phrase or line of a fixed, melodic composition, seen more typically in Dhrupad bandishes.
There are three variations of Bandish, regarding tempo :.
Vilambit Bandish : A slow and steady melodic composition, usually in Largo to Adagio speeds.
Madhyalaya Bandish : A medium tempo melodic competition, usually set in Andante to Allegretto speeds.
Drut Bandish : A fast tempo melodic composition, usually set to Allegretto speed, and onwards.
In the context of Indian classical music, Swara is a Sanskrit word that means a note in the octave.
Sargam is the Indian equivalent to solfege, a technique for the teaching of sight-singing.
The tone Sa is not associated with any particular pitch.
As in Western moveable-Do solfege, Sa refers to the tonic of a piece or scale rather than to any particular pitch.
In the general sense svara means tone, and applies to chanting and singing.
The basic swaras of Vedic chanting are udatta, anudatta and svarita.
Siksha is the subject that deals with phonetics and pronunciation.
Naradiya Siksha elaborately discusses the nature of swaras, both Vedic chants and the octave.
The basic mode of reference is that which is equivalent to the Western Ionian mode or major scale.
All relationships between pitches follow from this.
Sa and Pa are immovable, forming a just perfect fifth.
In some notation systems, the distinction is made with capital and lowercase letters.
The chart below assumes Sa to be at C. Swaras in Carnatic music.
The swaras in Carnatic music are slightly different in the twelve-note system.
There are three types each of Rishabha, Gandhara, Dhaivata and Nishada.
There are two types of Madhyama, while Panchama and Shadja are invariant.
As you can see above, Chatushruti Rishabha and Shuddha Gandhara share the same pitch.
Hence if C is chosen as Shadja, D would be both Chatushruti Rishabha and Shuddha Gandhara.
Hence they will not occur in same raga together.
Similarly for two swaras each at notes 4, 10 and 11.
Also, each swara is associated with one of the seven chakras of the body.
Just as the swaras ascend through the saptak, so they are mapped onto the chakras in the body in ascending order.
Shuddha and tivra notes are associated with the right side ; the right channel, Pingala Nadi, is the side of logic.
Ragas, therefore, have more or less of an effect on a given chakra depending on the notes they contain.
Special forms of swaras.
In the context of Indian classical music some specific forms of swara-s fulfill the technique of playing a note.
Such ornamentations in Indian classical music is important for the proper rendition and essential to create the beauty of a raga.
Some notes are linked with their preceding or succeeding notes ; these linked notes are called grace notes or kan-swars.
Kan-swars deal with so called touch notes.
Kan-swars can be executed vocally and on instruments in three ways :.
using a swift short glide,.
as a Sparsh and.
as a Krintan.
Andolit swars are raga-specific notes that are oscillated within the Andolan alankar.
The specification of the Andolan alankar is the oscillation from a fixed note touching the periphery of an adjacent note.
By this oscillation the shrutis are touched which exist in between.
Ahmed Jan Thirakwa.
His style of playing influenced many generations of tabla players.
He became Munir Khans disciple at the age of 12.
One noteworthy artiste in this category of admirers was the great Rabindrasangeet exponent Suchitra Mitra.
The name Thirakwa is not actually his original name, but was an epithet he earned from his gurus father.
This earned him the nickname thirakwa.
It is also rumored that his tone was similar to the thunderous cracking sound of lightning.
A great lightning is sometimes described as thirakwa.
In popular jargon, Ahmad Jaan Thirakwa is termed as the Mount Everest of Tabliyas.
Thirakwa was awarded the Sangeet Natak Akademi Award in 1954 and the Padma Bhushan in 1970.
Ust Ahmedjan Thirakwa, during his long career as a musician, trained many disciples all across India.
Sriram Parasuram is an Hindustani classical vocalist.
He also plays the violin.
He is married to Carnatic classical vocalist Anuradha Sriram, with whom he gives jugalbandis.
They have two sons named Jayant and Lokesh.
Parasuram received his Ph.D. in Ethnomusicology from Wesleyan University, where he met Anuradha when she was a masters student.
The Imdadkhani gharana is a North Indian school of sitar and surbahar music, stemming from the very ancient Gwalior gharana.
Many direct descendants of Imdad Khan continue the tradition today.
The Khan family is one of the most renowned musical families from India.
Living performers of the family include Imrat Khan, Shahid Parvez, Shujaat Khan, Nishat Khan, Irshad Khan, Wajahat Khan, and Hidayat Khan.
The musical tradition includes many notable musicians who studied with the family and perform in their musical style.
Ustad Sultan Khan was an Indian sarangi player and Classical vocalist belonging to Indore Gharana.
He was one of the members of the Indian fusion group Tabla Beat Science, with Zakir Hussain and Bill Laswell.
He was awarded the Padma Bhushan, Indias third highest civilian honor, in 2010.
Sultan Khan was born in Sikar, Rajasthan, near Jaipur, the princely state of in the Indian Empire.
He learned sarangi from his father Gulab Khan.
He started his career at the radio station Rajkot in Gujarat as a 20 year old boy.
This proved a turning point for him.
In 1997 he was requested to perform at Prince Charles 50th birthday celebrations.
Omkarnath Thakur, Ustad Nazakat ali-Salamat ali khan, Kishori Amonkar are the name to few.
He is acknowledged both as a Sarangi player and a vocalist & has several albums to his credit.
He has taught music producers such as Sukshinder Shinda and Ram Gopal Varma to play the sarangi.
He contributed vocals and sarangi to Dizrhythmias first LP and Gavin Harrison s 1998 solo album Sanity & Gravity.
It was this time whenhe became a regular artist for BBC Radio London.
He has several albums to his credits and he has been applauded by for his performances by Madonna.
He also performed in a Sufi Music Festival at the White house in Washington, United States of America.
Sultan Khan appeared on Good People in Times of Evil in 2000 with Jonas Hellborg and guitar virtuoso Shawn Lane.
Ustad Sultan Khans album Piya Basanti was released in 2000 and its was the number one album of the year.
Sultan Khan performed for the Tamil film Yogi.
He played a solo sarangi for Yogis theme and also for the song Yaarodu Yaaro from the same album.
His brother Niyaz Ahmed Khan is a Sitar player.
Outside the family he had many students including Ikram khan & Dr. Kashyap Dave.
Khan died on 27 November 2011 in Mumbai, Maharashtra, India after a prolonged illness.
He was undergoing dialysis for the last four years and lost his speech in his last few days.
He died on his way to the hospital.
The funeral was held in his hometown of Jodhpur, Rajasthan on 28 November 2011.
Alhaiya Bilaval is a Hindustani classical raga.
Its the most commonly performed raga of the large Bilawal group, which mainly includes ragas based on the western major scale.
It is often simply referred to as Bilawal, although in the 17th century Alhaiya and Bilawal may have been separate ragas.
Writing about the musical theory of Indian classical music is fraught with complications.
First of all, there have been no set, formal methods of written notation.
Indian music is an aural tradition, and therefore writing is not an essential part of attaining talim.
Arohana & Avarohana.
S GR G P ND N S. S ND hn D P M G MR S. Vadi & Samavadi.
Komal Swar : N in Avroh.
Varjit Swar : M in Aaroh.
Organization & Relationships.
Related ragas : Bilawal, Shuddha Bilawal, Devgiri Bilawal, Shukla Bilawal, Kakubh Bilawal.
Thaat : Bilawal.
Behavior refers to practical aspects of the music.
It is complicated to talk about this for Hindustani music since many of the concepts are fluid, changing, or archaic.
The following information can not be accurate, but it can attempt to reflect how the music existed.
Morning, around 6AM - 9AM.
Certain ragas have seasonal associations.
Rao, Suvarnalata ; der Meer, Wim van ; Harvey, Jane The Raga Guide : A Survey of 74 Hindustani Ragas.
Zenith Media, London : 1999.
Ramesh L. Nadkarni.
Ramesh Laxman Nadkarni was a Hindustani classical music singer from Jogeshwari.
Nadkarni a disciple of Aman Ali Khan had composed over 250 melodies and Ragas.
He was honored for his dedicated lifelong service to classical music and was awarded a fellowship by Sursingar Sansad, Mumbai.
He was part of BHENDI BAZAR GHARANA.
Ramesh was born in Mumbai in 1921 to a Chitrapur Saraswat Brahmin family from Bankikodla-Hanehalli.
His father Laxman Nadkarni was an employee of the mint facility at Hyderabad.
Ramesh spent his childhood in Bankikodla.
After completing his middle school, he came to Mumbai to study music.
His mother Uma a devotional singer inspired young Ramesh to study Hindustani music.
After graduating from the University of Mumbai, he continued his music interest to earn Sangeeta Pravaeena.
Nadkarni had already become a disciple of Aman Ali Khan.
Ramesh was married to Sushila Balwally from Ankola.
At the age of 37, AIR hired Ramesh Nadkarni as a music producer in Cuttack.
Nadkarni wrote a biography of Mallikarjun Mansur in Kannada titled Nanna Ras Yatre.
His life and style.
Nadkarni was a Music Guru of a different type.
Nadkarni, though basically followed BHENDI BAZAR GHARANA style of singing was very broad and open minded.
Nadkarni was a devotee of Bhagawan Nityananda and wrote a biography of Bhagawan Nityananda in Kannada and other languages.
Ramesh Nadkarni was simple, generous human being ; he was a performer, producer, director and a teacher of classical music.
Nadkarni was handicapped with Asthma but he knew how to get his own way.
He dedicated his life for writing and singing Ragas and melodies and died on September 7, 1995 ; he was 74.
Raga - Jogkauns.
HE MAAN KAHE KARAT VICHAR, DWANDWA TYAJA, SUMIR AMAR NIT NIRAKAR.
CHINTANA KAR NISHCHINTA CHITTA DHAR HAR KAR PAKARAT KAR NIRADHAR KO.
The meaning in English of this composition is somewhat as below.
Oh, you mind !.
why do you always steeped in thoughts.
Do not engage yourself in the duality of thoughts.
Give up this duality.
I ask you to listen to the inner voice of God in you.
Raga - Bairagi Bhairav.
This composition can be interpreted in two different ways.
SUR SURAS SADHALE RASIK GAON.
SABAD SALONE LAYA TAAL SURANSO.
AMAR KAHAT HAI NIRAKH SANS KO AUR LAYATARANG RAS BARASE.
The meaning in English of this composition is somewhat as below.
You should practice to sing the correct notes and sing them melodiously.
The words of your composition should be beautiful and well-interwoven in the rhythmic patters.
I say that, while singing, you must constantly watch your breath.
If you follow these, you would present ripples of good and enjoyable music.
Nadakarni has contributed a lot to Kannada light music as well.
Kannada poet B.A. Sanadi recollects how Nadakarni set tunes to Kannada lyrics being in Mumbai.
His compositions are very melodious and quite different in approach.
Todays Kannada Light Music fraternity doesnt take note of his work.
Personal life and education.
Rai was born in France and studied music in India.
Rai was the last student of Allauddin Khan, who is best known as the teacher of Ravi Shankar.
He died in his New York apartment shortly after a Carnegie Hall performance.
From 1969 to 1985 he conducted the Alam School of Music in Greenwich Village.
Alla Rakha, Mahapurush Misra, Shamta Prasad, and Zakir Hussain usually accompanied him on the tabla.
Rai had been signed exclusively by Vanguard Records from 1975 to 1982.
Vasants first commercial recording was by EMI and on the tabla was the late Alla Rakha.
Rai also trained a number of Indian classical musicians.
The more noted ones are sarod players Pradeep Kumar Barot, Ashok Roy,.
Stephen James, and sitar players Amiya Das Gupta, Deepak Chaudhary and Shamim Khan.
Daron Vartan Malakian is an American singer-songwriter, multi-instrumentalist, and record producer.
He is placed 30th in Guitar Worlds List of The 100 Greatest Heavy Metal Guitarists of All Time.
Vartan Malakian is a painter, dancer, and choreographer and Zepur Malakian is a sculptor who used to instruct college-level sculpture.
Malakian started listening to Van Halen, Iron Maiden, Judas Priest, Motorhead and Ozzy Osbourne among others.
After a few years I gained a reputation as being a guitar player in high school.
I dont pretend to be Mr. Guitar Virtuoso.
During his teens Malakian listened to thrash metal bands such as Slayer, Venom, Metallica, Pantera and Sepultura.
Malakian attended Glendale High School as a teenager.
He is a lifelong fan of the Edmonton Oilers and has a large collection of Oilers-related memorabilia.
Malakian met Serj Tankian in 1993, while they both shared the same rehearsal studio in different bands.
Tankian was playing keyboard for a band, and Daron was playing guitar and singing for another band.
They formed a jam band called Soil with bassist Dave Hakopyan and drummer Domingo Laraino.
Shavo Odadjian then became their manager, and then rhythm guitarist.
The poem 's title was  Victims of a Down  but Odadjian thought system was a stronger word than victims.
They then recruited drummer Andy Khachaturian, who was replaced by John Dolmayan in 1997.
In 2003, Malakian started his own label, EatUrMusic, on which Amen was the first signed band.
The label is now inactive and its current status is unknown.
Scars on Broadway.
Incidentally, these demo sessions produced B.Y.O.B., which would be a major hit for System of a Down in 2005.
Ultimately, Odadjian was not involved with the band, and instead System of a Down drummer, John Dolmayan became a member.
The group released an eponymous album in 2008, which featured the hit single They Say.
This sudden cancellation prompted speculation and rumors that the band had broken up.
It was the last that would be heard of Malakian for more than a year.
In August 2009, Scars on Broadway, minus Malakian, traveled to Iraq for a USO tour across the U.S. army bases.
Their setlist consisted of covers as well as a few Scars songs.
Guitarist/vocalist Franky Perez stated on his Twitter that the Scars tunes sound amazing but theyre not the same without D.
He also stated before they left that Malakian had given them his blessing.
On May 2, 2010 Malakian reunited with Scars on Broadway at the Troubadour in West Hollywood.
It was the first time he had performed with the band since October 2008.
The group played songs from their album as well as new songs.
Odadjian performed with the band for two songs, playing guitar.
It was the first time that the band members performed together in more than three years.
Malakian, Odadjian, and Dolmayan played Aerials and Toxicity.
He appeared on Cypress Hill s 2010 album Rise Up, on one song, Trouble Seeker, which he also produced.
On August 20, 2010, Malakian played in Hollywood with Scars on Broadway.
They played at the Download Festival on June 11, 2011.
Despite playing a number of reunion shows, the band had no plans to record new material.
Malakian has also produced a number of albums.
Pandit Jitendra Abhisheki was an Indian vocalist, composer and scholar of Indian classical, semi-classical, and devotional music.
While he distinguished himself in Hindustani music, he is also credited for revival of the Marathi musical theatre in the 1960s.
Early life and background.
Abhisheki was born in a priestly Padhye Brahmin family in Mangeshi, Goa.
His family was traditionally attached to the Mangueshi Temple of Lord Shiva.
Balawantrao taught Jitendra the basic principles of Hindustani classical music.
He composed vocal as well as background scores for 25 Marathi plays.
Besides son Shounak Abhisheki, the following are Pandit Abhishekis well-known musical disciples :.
The Veena is an Indian and Pakistani plucked stringed instrument used mainly in Indian classical music.
It derives its distinctive timbre and resonance from sympathetic strings, bridge design, a long hollow neck and a gourd resonating chamber.
It subsequently underwent many changes, and the modern sitar evolved in 18th century India.
A person who plays a veena is called a vainika.
Etymology and history.
But the early veenaas could be plucked string instruments of any type.
Found in the list of Musical instruments used by Tamil people out in Tirumurai dated 6th to 11th century.
The early Gupta veenaa : depiction and playing technique.
The instrument has bridges fixed to the main resonating chamber, or kaddu, at the base of the instrument.
The instruments bridges are made of deer horn, ebony, or very occasionally from camel bone.
Synthetic material is now common as well.
Veena is a generic name for a host of string instruments.
Anokhelal was born in a very poor family of Kashi, now known as Varanasi.
Anokhelal learnt tabla under Bhairow Prasad Mishra.
Anokhelal Learnt Tabla for about 15 years from Bhairow Prasad Mishra.
Bhairow Prasad Mishra was disciple of Bhagat-ji.
Bhagat-ji was disciple of Ram Sahai, the founder of The Banaras-Baj.
He lost his parents as teenager.
After that he was brought up by his grand mother.
As a child, Anokhelal had to suffer poverty and deprivation.
Anokhelal put in unremitting riyaaz under the guidance of Guruji, which went on for hours together, every day.
He was called the Jadugar of Na Dhin Dhin Na and Dhere Dhere Kite Taka.
He used to play these and many more syllables with clarity even at extreme speed.
He was very at fast playing Na Dhin Dhin Na with his 1st finger.
Pandit Anokhelal was a soloist as well as an accompanist.
Some of them are Ustad Allauddin Khan, Ustad Vilayat Khan, Ustad Ali Akbar Khan, etc.
Within his short span of life he performed regularly, throughout India.
In the late 50s, his programmes were broadcast by the Voice of America as well.
Legacy and Critical Acclaim.
He is also known as the Samrat of Tabla Playing.
All together he is known as Tabla Samrat Pandit Anokhelal Mishra.
According to many, Anokhelal goes the credit of making the audience familiar with the Banaras style of Tabla.
His Disciple Chandra Nath Shastri has written about Pandit Anokhelal Mishra in his web article :.
Tabla Player Pandit Samta Prasad Mishra said in an interview that :.
Tabla Player Sadanand Naimpalli written in his book about Anokhelal.
He said :.
Nature and Personality.
He used to maintain a sober and normal life profile rather than showing off and behaving like a celebrity.
He never publicized himself of what he was.
Anokhelal trained many musicians of India.
According to Sandip Bhattacharya :.
A short video of Anokhelal Ji has been made available by the Film Archives on Youtube.
Zia Fariduddin Dagar.
He taught at the Dhrupad Kendra, Bhopal, along with his elder brother, Ustad Zia Mohiuddin Dagar for 25 years.
Early life and training.
He was taught dhrupad vocal & veena by his father.
Ustad Zia Fariduddin Dagar has done a lot for popularizing dhrupad music by his numerous concerts and workshops.
In 2005, he was presented with the Lifetime Achievement Award by the North American Dhrupad Association.
He was the most influential dhrupad vocalist in India after the senior Dagar Brothers.
By 1980, he had virtually settled down in Austria teaching Dhrupad in Austria and France.
During the making of the film, they spent over two months in Madhya Pradesh, a lot of time in Bhopal.
In those days, Shri Arjun Singh was the Chief Minister of M.P. Cultural development was one of his passions.
It is because of him that the magnificent Bharat Bhavan cultural center came up in Bhopal.
At that time, the Secretary to the Department of Culture in MP was Shri Ashok Vajpayee.
Shri Vajpayee offered to start a government - supported Dhrupad Gurukul in Bhopal.
Ustadsahib agreed to move back to India and to take charge as the Guru at this Gurukul.
He was a distinguished guest faculty at Dhrupad Sansar, IIT Bombay for a span of 5 years.
His students include the Ritwik Sanyal, Pushparaj Koshti, Nirmalya Dey, the Gundecha Brothers, Uday Bhawalkar, and his nephew Bahauddin Dagar.
Zia Mohiuddin Dagar / Zia Fariduddin Dagar.
Jhala is a term in Hindustani classical music which denotes the fast-paced conclusions of classical compositions or raga.
It is often characterized by the overwhelming of the melodic component by the rhythmic component.
This is sometimes effected by the rapid striking together of the chikari between notes.
Some common types of alankar used in classical music are meend, kan-swar, andolan, gamaka, khatka/gitkari and murki.
A raga is one of the melodic modes used in Indian classical music.
A raga uses a series of five or more musical notes upon which a melody is constructed.
In the Indian musical tradition, ragas are associated with different times of the day, or with seasons.
Indian classical music is always set in a raga.
Non-classical music such as popular Indian film songs and ghazals sometimes use ragas in their compositions.
Joep Bor of the Rotterdam Conservatory of Music defined Raga as tonal framework for composition and improvisation.
A figurative sense of the word as passion, love, desire, delight is also found in the Mahabharata.
Ragini is a term for the feminine counterpart or wife to a raga.
The raga-ragini scheme from about the 14th century aligned 6 male ragas with 6 wives.
Ragas and their seasons.
Many Hindustani ragas are prescribed for the particular time of a day or a season.
When performed at the suggested time, the raga has its maximum effect.
However, these prescriptions are not strictly followed, especially since modern concerts are generally held in the evening.
The result of these various influences is that there is increasing flexibility as to when ragas may be performed.
Although notes are an important part of raga practice, they alone do not make the raga.
A raga is more than a scale, and many ragas share the same scale.
The underlying scale may have five, six or seven tones, called swaras.
Ragas that have five swaras are called audava ragas ; those with six, shaadava ; and with seven, sampurna.
Those ragas that do not follow the strict ascending or descending order of swaras are called vakra ragas.
For example, Darbari Kanada and Jaunpuri share the same notes but are entirely different in their renderings.
Northern and southern differences.
The two streams of Indian classical music, Carnatic music and Hindustani music, have independent sets of ragas.
There is some overlap, but more false friendship.
As ragas were transmitted orally from teacher to student, some ragas can vary greatly across regions, traditions and styles.
Many ragas have also been evolving over the centuries.
There have been efforts to codify and standardise raga performance in theory from their first mention in Matangas Brihaddeshi.
In Carnatic music, ragas are classified as Janaka ragas and Janya ragas.
Janaka ragas are the ragas from which the Janya ragas are created.
Janaka ragas are grouped together using a scheme called Katapayadi sutra and are organised as Melakarta ragas.
A Melakarta raga is one which has all seven notes in both the arohanam and avarohanam.
Some Melakarta ragas are Harikambhoji, Kalyani, Kharaharapriya, Mayamalavagowla, Sankarabharanam and Todi.
Janya ragas are derived from the Janaka ragas using a combination of the swarams from the parent raga.
Some janya ragas are Abheri, Abhogi, Bhairavi, Hindolam, Mohanam and Kambhoji.
See the full List of Janya Ragas for more.
Each raga has a definite collection and orders of swaras.
In Carnatic music, there are 7 basic notes of which there are a total of 16 varieties.
The seven basic swarams of Carnatic music are : Sa, Ri, Ga, Ma, Pa, Da, Ni.
The raga-ragini scheme is a classification scheme used from the 14th century to the 19th century.
It usually consists of 6 male ragas each with 6 wives and a number of sons and even daughters-in-law.
Some Ragamala paintings can be found in :.
Sharat Chandra Srivastava.
Sharat Chandra Srivastava is a North Indian classical violinist of the Senia gharana.
Early life and training.
Srivastava was born in New Delhi on 17 October 1971.
He started learning violin at the age of 7 from his grandfather, the renowned North Indian violinist Pt Joi Srivastava.
He has been performing Hindustani classical music for over 25 years.
He was part of Indias premier rock band Parikrama for 12 years.
He left Parikrama in 1999 and started the Delhi based fusion band called Mrigya.
He is also a member of the world music quartet India Alba.
He is a recipient of the National Scholarship from the Ministry of Human Resources and Development, Government of India.
In 1998, he performed with Sting in an all acoustic set at the Channel V awards held at New Delhi.
He has also performed with Ustad Amjad Ali Khan, Pt.
Hari Prasad Chaurasia, Pt.
Birju Maharaj and many other stalwarts.
As a teacher.
Sharat has taught Indian classical violin at the Gandharva Mahavidyalaya, New Delhi from 1999 to 2007.
Additionally, he has conducted workshops in Winterthur University, Switzerland.
Strings of the World.
Sharat is the festival director of Strings of the World -- a world-music festival dedicated to string instruments.
R. C. Mehta.
Ramanlal C. Mehta was born on October 31, 1918 at Surat in the state of Gujarat.
He was with All India Radio for 9 years prior to his taking up principal-ship of the Baroda Music College.
He composed and produced above fifty musical dramas and features over A.I.R., Bombay, Ahmedabad and Baroda.
A purist by training, he is a modernist by outlook, appreciating all schools and synthesis thereof.
As an academician he has served the cause of music education in India for over 45 years.
He has served as Expert member on national as well as State Institutions and Universities.
He has served as Editor of the Journal of the Indian Musicological Society, since its inception, in 1970, retiring in 2005.
He has served as an expert member on the Central Music Audition Board of All India Radio.
Padmabhushan Prof. R. C. Mehta has always been associated with innovations in field of music.
He published a collection of papers presented s Distance Education in Music.
Almost all significant conferences, seminars, workshops have benefited by his presence.
He travels only when necessary these days, but assists organizers, scholars, students over phone and through e-mail.
Author and critic.
He has written and published extensively on various aspects of music.
His publications include :.
Mehta has published several research papers in scholarly journals.
He has published, under his editorship, some twenty two books, all devoted to research aspects of music.
These include :.
Awards and honors.
Prof. Mehta is the recipient of many awards, which include :.
He is busy with several projects ; almost all resulting into a book.
Preface to this book can be viewed on omenad as also of his latest book Indian Classical Music and Gharana Traditions.
Michael William Deasy is an American rock and jazz guitarist.
He is sometimes credited as Mike Deasy Sr.
He was born and raised in Los Angeles, California, where he learned to play guitar as a child.
He also played with The Coasters and Duane Eddy.
Following Cochrans death in 1960, he became an active session musician in Los Angeles.
He played guitar on Elvis Presley s 1968 TV special, Elvis.
In 1969, he was invited by record producer Terry Melcher to work with a newly discovered singer-songwriter, Charles Manson.
Deasy left Mansons home after three days, in a state of drug-fueled paranoia.
Deasy continued to record with leading musicians, including Frank Sinatra, Ella Fitzgerald, Barbra Streisand, Chet Baker, and Mel Torme.
The Deasys also co-pastor Rock Church Southeast in Port Arthur, Texas.
Pt Joi Srivastava was a well-known North Indian violinist of the Senia Gharana.
Early life and training.
Joi Srivastava was born in Allahabad on 1 January 1930.
He was a prodigy who became a master of the instrument even before he turned 20.
He started teaching at the University of Allahabad and also at Kala Bharati Allahabad.
After that he taught violin at the Gandharva Mahavidyalaya, Delhi till 1994.
Joi Srivastava pioneered a unique style of playing North Indian Classical music on the violin.
He also went further and imbibed techniques of Carnatic Veena and Western classical as well into his playing.
Joi Srivastava was a teacher to many violinists of North India, and also of other countries :.
Sanyal was born in Katihar.
He completed his Ph.D. in musicology from the same university, 1980 under the supervision of Prem Lata Sharma.
He has around 50 published papers in various journals, and also composes dhrupad lyrics.
He is a casual grade A artist at All India Radio, Varanasi.
He has assimilated the Dagarvani tradition of Dhrupad and evolved a distinctive style of his own in the rendering of Dhrupad.
He has specialized in advanced technique of Alap - Jod - Jhala, laykari, voice culture and pedagogy both traditional and institutional.
Bhatkhande Music Institute.
Bhatkhande Music Institute is a renowned music institute in Lucknow.
During the 1970s & 1980s, the institute organized annual festivals in which the most eminent of the country 's musicians performed.
In fact, some of the memorable concerts, that included performances by stars like Pd.
During the same period various new courses, like  Thumri , were introduced.
In 2005, it organised a three-day classical music festival part of the Lucknow Mahotsav.
S. N. Ratanjankar principal.
Surendra Shanker Awasthi principal.
Pandit Satyasheel Deshpande is an Indian musician who specializes in singing khyal.
He is a disciple of Pt.
Kumar Gandharva and the son of musicologist Vamanrao Deshpande.
Like his greatest mentor - Pt.
Kumar Gandharva, Satyasheelji was born with a capacity to reproduce the music of the great masters.
This talent together with the musical exposure he received in his father, the musicologist Pt.
Vamanrao Deshpande 's house established him as a child prodigy.
The Samvaad Foundation.
Other films have seen him singing with Bharat Ratna Lata Mangeshkar.
` Kahen ' is Satyasheeljis two-CD anthology of 16 bandishes - both traditional as well as his own.
Kahen is an attempt to present such haikus that hold their own in spite of the epic Bada Khayal.
The recordings were supervised by Pt.
The album was released by Bharat Ratna Lata Mangeshkar.
Thumri Katha - The Story of the Thumri.
The Thumri a form of north Indian music.
The Thumri is an expression of Shringar Rasa - a passionate, playful utterances of the young woman in love.
The album has Satyasheelji singing seven Thumris.
Among the many awards Pt.
Satyasheel Deshpande has received are :.
Dr. N. Rajam is an Indian violinist who performs Hindustani classical music.
She remained Professor of Music at Banaras Hindu University, eventually became Chair of the department and the Dean of the college.
Early life and training.
N. Rajam was born in Ernakulam-Kerala in 1938 in a musical family.
Her father, Vidwan A. Narayana Iyer was a well-known exponent of Carnatic Music.
Her brother, T. N. Krishnan, is also a famous violist.
Rajam started her initial training in Carnatic music under her father.
She also trained under Musiri Subramania Iyer, and learned raga development from vocalist Pandit Omkarnath Thakur.
Rajam received the prestigious titles of Padma Shri and Padma Bhushan from the Government of India.
People often refer to her music as the Singing Violin.
Rajam started playing violin at age three.
By the age of nine, she was a professional musician.
With guidance of her father, A. Narayana Iyer, she developed the Gayaki Ang.
Rajam has performed across the globe and in numerous places throughout India.
Rajam was a Professor of Music at Banaras Hindu University in the Faculty of Performing Arts for nearly 40 years.
She has been the Chair of the department and the Dean of the college at BHU.
Many of her students from BHU are famous violinists, including Satya Prakash Mohanty, V. Balaji and Swarna Khuntia.
Ragini Trivedi is Indian classical musician performing on vichitra veena, sitar and jal tarang.
Ragini was born in Kanpur, India.
At Varanasi, the family resided on second floor at Rewa Kothi where vocalist Pt.
Omkarnath Thakur stayed on the ground floor.Thus aesthetics and academics of music helped refine sensibilities of the chidren.
Her natural excellence influenced her teachers to guide her towards playing musical instruments.
Her music teacher, Shobha Parvatkar encouraged Ragini to play Jaltarang.
Ragini lost her mother on April 9, 1977, and father on 17 July 1979.
She and her brother Gopal, drew strength from their inheritance of music practice and scholarship.
Ragini continued her pursuit of music, getting gold medal in M.Mus.
from Banaras Hindu University and completing D. Mus.
under her guide, K. C. Gangrade in 1983.
For some time she taught at Banaras Hindu University and later taught Sitar in government colleges at Hoshangabad, Rewa and Indore.
Of the three instruments, Jal tarang recital was first to be broadcast.
First on-stage sitar recital was at Suprabha, an event organized under the mentorship of Pt.
Vichitra Veena was first presented at Bharat Bhawan, Bhopal.
In this new style, Dr. Misra had introduced Mizrab Bol DA RDA - R DA.
Especially, in Vilambit pace, the oblique rhythm patterns - Da Rda - R Da -- manifest a new dimension of Raga.
Ragini has designed and conducted various workshops on teaching this style at Jaipur, Pune and Bhopal.
Ragini developed a new notation system, Ome Swarlipi, based on amalgamation of Bhatkhande and Paluskar notation systems.
It incorporates several features suitable for digital adaptation and features symbols to annotate complex Misrabani compositions.
This digital notation-writing is available on Writer portal.
She also developed digital tools to illustrate inter-relationship of notes, Sruti - s, Bharat Chatuh Sarana to serve as a teaching-aid.
Ragini writes on theory, practice and innovation in music.
She has collaborated in the creation of compendium and anthologies, in the capacity of contributor and editor.
Raginis discussions with musicians, Ustad Moinuddin Khan, Pt.
Rajshekhar Mansur, Dr. Sharada Velankar, Pt.
Purbayan Chatterjee is an Indian sitar player and composer who lives in Kolkata, India.
He is noted for amalgamating traditional Indian classical music with contemporary world music genres.
Early life and career.
He has performed as a solo artist and as a part of the groups Shastriya Syndicate and Stringstruck.
He is also a vocalist and has performed in duet with Shankar Mahadevan.
He has performed several times with tabla artist Ustad Zakir Hussain.
He has also received the Aditya Vikram Birla Award for excellence and contributions to the field.
He has also been honoured with the Rasoi Award by Rotary International in 1995.
The album Lehar released by Times Music in 2008 has remained the bestseller for a year and a half.
Shankar Mahadevan has performed the title song Dwo in Chaterjees fusion album Stringstruck, released by Times Music.
Chatterjee has performed in the following venues :.
He has also performed in the following music festivals :.
Shankar Jaikishan, were a duo who composed Indian music for the Hindi film industry, who worked together from 1949-1971.
Shankar-Jaikishan, along with other artists, wrote everlasting and immortal melodies in the fifties and sixties.
Their best work was noted for being raga-based and having both lilt and sonority.
During his formative years, Shankar played the tabla and learned the art formally from Baba Nasir Khansahib.
For many years, Shankar studied as a disciple of the legendary composer Khawaja Khurshid Anwar, in whose orchestra he performed.
Jaikishan was adept at playing the harmonium.
Subsequently, he obtained his musical lessons from Sangeet Visharad Wadilalji and later from Prem Shankar Nayak.
After moving to Mumbai, he became a disciple of Vinayak Tambe.
Shankar worked as assistant to the leading composer duo of Husnlal Bhagatram.
Of course, later, Papaji honoured Shankars selection and gladly accepted Jaikishan as a Harmonium player at Prithvi.
Apart from following their musical pursuits, they also used to play significant roles in various plays including the famous play Pathan.
Thus, the three had met at Prithvi Theater, run by Raj Kapoors father, Prithviraj Kapoor.
Barsaat : the first break.
Raj Kapoor made his debut as a director with the film Aag in 1948.
Its musical score.
It also had the distinction of giving two firsts to Hindi cinema - a title song and a cabaret.
Early works b/w 1949-1959.
The two became known by the acronym S-J.
S-J formed a core team with lyricists Shailendra and Hasrat Jaipuri and with singers Mohammed Rafi and Lata Mangeshkar.
Among the directors, they worked most closely with Raj Kapoor and were considered the kingpins of his legendary banner RK Films.
They were commercial geniuses in addition to be wonderfully god-blessed on music.
S-J worked with almost all singers of their time.
S-J were the house composers for RK Films and were on their pay-roll till the end.
Raj Kapoor used to maintain a music bank where he stored compositions of S-J.
Most of S-Js films show Dattaram and Sebastian as their assistants.
Dattaram handled the percussion section of the orchestra and composed original beats, and Sebastian handled the rest.
Shankar met Dattaram when the latter was a page boy at Prithvi Theatres and stayed with him throughout.
As recalled by Dattaram, Sebastian composed the musical background of most of S-Js songs and also conducted the orchestra.
Thus S-J were fortunate to have top quality assistants and used their talents well.
Shankar-Jaikishans compositions broke new ground in Hindi film music.
Apart from relying upon their knowledge of Indian classical music, they also employed western beats and orchestration.
With very few exceptions, they always used different interludes before each stanza.
Shankar-Jaikishan made a significant contribution in promoting Indian classical music throughout their career.
It was their established practice to have at least one song in a movie based on semi-classical style.
Their music in ` Basant Bahar and Amrapali both of which had every song based upon Indian classical music.
While raga Bhairavi remained their perennial favorite, SJ used a variety of Raagas in their compositions.
Shankar Jaikishan also used the western classical - based waltz rhythm in a number of songs.
Shankar-Jaikishan gave a new style and meaning to the genre of sad songs by composing them on a fast tempo.
Working styles : SJ were two composers in one name.
While working as a team, Shankar and Jaikishan used to compose their songs separately.
Between the two, Shankar was the senior partner and hence, he would usually arrange the orchestra, even for Jaikishans songs.
There was a gentlemans agreement between them for not identifying the actual composer of the song.
It is understood that in RK films, Shankar and Jaikishan both used to work on the background scores.
On the other hand, both Shankar and Jaikishan were equally proficient in scoring western music based songs.
Furthermore, each of the two could compose in others style now and then thereby making the identification still more difficult.
Shankar Jaikishan made a major contribution towards the development of Jazz music in India and the new genre Indo Jazz.
Their 1968 album Raaga-Jazz style is the earliest Indo-Jazz recording in India.
During their career, S-J won Filmfare Best Music Director Awards nine times.
The Sur-Singar Awards.
Bengal Film Journalists Association Awards.
The so-called disputes/differences between Shankar and Jaikishan.
In a signed article in Filmfare, Jaikishan identified unwittingly the song Yeh Mera Prem Patra Padh Kar as his composition.
Jaikishan, however, stuck to Lata Mangeshkar for his compositions.
Nevertheless, she continued singing for Jaikishan even after Sangam and till the end.
Standing in the industry.
S-J enjoyed an unrivaled position in the Hindi film industry.
S-J staged a show in Shanmukhanad Hall, Mumbai in 1970 under the aegis of the Indian Navy.
Jaikishans death and SJs post-Jaikishan era.
Jaikishan died in 1971 due to cirrhosis of liver, a disease caused by excessive consumption of alcohol.
After Jaikishans death, Shankar carried on with the banner of Shankar-Jaikishan alone.
According to Lata Mangeshkar herself, it was the late Mohd.
Eventually, the project itself was abandoned by producer-to-be Dharmendra.
Ironically, Mukesh owed his standing in the film industry primarily to S-Js compositions.
Shankar died in 1987.
His death received nominal media coverage and his funeral was attended only by his family and some friends.
The film industry was hardly represented at his funeral, thus reinforcing the stereotype of its fickle-natured loyalties.
Raj Kapoor later paid glowing tributes to the colleague of his salad days in a televised interview.
Bhosle was a tabla player and had become closely associated with Shankarji.
He used to play rhythm in Shankarjis orchestra from 1945 until Shankarjis death.
All the musicians waited the whole day for Shankarji in the studio but he didnt turn up.
The next day, Bhosle read the news of Shankarjis death on 26 April.
Chandrakant Bhosle is now settleled in GOPURAM ShriRang Nagar, Near Rathi Amrai, Gangapur Road, Nashik, Maharashtra.
Hindustani classical music.
Hindustani classical music is the Hindustani or North Indian style of Indian classical music found throughout the northern Indian subcontinent.
The style is sometimes called North Indian classical music or Shastriya Sangit.
Around the 12th century, Hindustani classical music diverged from what eventually came to be identified as Carnatic classical music.
These principles were refined in the musical treatises Natya Shastra, by Bharata, and Dattilam.
Noted composers such as Tansen flourished, along with religious groups like the Vaishnavites.
After the 16th century, the singing styles diversified into different gharanas patronized in different princely courts.
Around 1900, Vishnu Narayan Bhatkhande consolidated the musical structures of Hindustani classical music, called ragas, into a number of thaats.
Indian classical music has seven basic notes with five interspersed half-notes, resulting in a 12-note scale.
Other characteristics include king and queen notes and characteristic phrases.
In addition each raga has its natural register and portamento rules.
Performances are usually marked by considerable improvisation within these norms.
Not only was the text important, but also the manner in which they had been enunciated by the immortals.
The Samaveda outlined the ritual chants for singing the verses of the Rigveda, particularly for offerings of Soma.
These refer to the notes of a flute, which was the only fixed-frequency instrument.
This is why the second note is called pratham.
Music is dealt with extensively in the Valmiki Ramayana.
Narada is an accomplished musician, as is Ravana ; Saraswati with her veena is the goddess of music.
In the Vishnudharmottara Purana, the Naga king Ashvatara asks to know the svaras from Saraswati.
The most important text on music in the ancient canon is Bharata s Natya Shastra, composed around the 3rd century CE.
It also discusses various arrangements of the notes, the permutations and combinations of note-sequences, and alankara or elaboration.
Dattilam categorizes melodic structure into 18 groups called jati, which are the fundamental melodic structures similar to the raga.
The names of the jatis reflect regional origins, for example andhri and oudichya.
Music also finds mention in Buddhist and Jain texts from the earliest periods of the Christian era.
Narada actually names and classifies the system in its earlier form before the Persian influences introduced changes in the system.
Medieval period : Persian influence.
The advent of Islamic rule under the Delhi Sultanate and later the Mughal Empire over northern India caused considerable cultural interchange.
The most influential musician of the Delhi Sultanate period was Amir Khusrau, sometimes called the father of modern Hindustani classical music.
He created the qawwali genre, which fuses Persian melody and beat on a dhrupad like structure.
A number of instruments were also introduced in his time.
The compositions by the court musician Sadarang in the court of Muhammad Shah bear a closer affinity to the modern khyal.
They suggest that while khyal already existed in some form, Sadarang may have been the father of modern khyal.
As the Mughal Empire came into closer contact with Hindus, especially under Jalal ud-Din Akbar, music and dance also flourished.
In particular, the musician Tansen introduced a number of innovations, including ragas and particular compositions.
Many musician families obtained large grants of land which made them self-sufficient, at least for a few generations.
Meanwhile the Bhakti and Sufi traditions continued to develop and interact with the different gharanas and groups.
Until the late 19th century, Hindustani classical music was imparted on a one-on-one basis through the guru-shishya tradition.
In addition, the system forced the music to be limited to a small subsection of the Indian community.
To a large extent it was limited to the palaces and dance halls.
Then a fortunate turn of events started the renaissance of Hindustani classical music.
First, as the power of the maharajahs and nawabs declined in early 20th century, so did their patronage.
Independent of each other, they spread Hindustani classical music to the masses in general, and the Marathi middle class in particular.
Vishnu Digambar Paluskar emerged as a talented musician and organizer despite having been blinded at age 12.
Paluskars contemporary Vishnu Narayan Bhatkhande recognized the many rifts that had appeared in the structure of Indian classical music.
He undertook extensive research visits to a large number of gharanas, Hindustani as well as Carnatic, collecting and comparing compositions.
With the advance of films and other public media, musicians started to make their living through public performances.
As India was exposed to Western music, some Western melodies started merging with classical forms, especially in popular music.
A number of Gurukuls, such as that of Alauddin Khan at Maihar, flourished.
In more modern times, corporate support has also been forthcoming, as at the ITC Sangeet Research Academy.
Principles of Hindustani music.
The rhythmic organization is based on rhythmic patterns called tala.
The melodic foundations are called ragas.
Thaats may consist of up to seven scale degrees, or swara.
Hindustani musicians name these pitches using a system called Sargam, the equivalent of the Western movable do solfege :.
Both systems repeat at the octave.
The fine intonational differences between different instances of the same swara are called srutis.
The three primary registers of Indian classical music are mandra, madhya and taar.
Since the octave location is not fixed, it is also possible to use provenances in mid-register for certain ragas.
A typical rendition of Hindustani raga involves two stages :.
Types of compositions.
The major vocal forms or styles associated with Hindustani classical music are dhrupad, khyal, and tarana.
Dhrupad is an old style of singing, traditionally performed by male singers.
It is performed with a tambura and a pakhawaj as instrumental accompaniments.
The rudra veena, an ancient string instrument, is used in instrumental music in dhrupad.
Dhrupad music is primarily devotional in theme and content.
It contains recitals in praise of particular deities.
Dhrupad compositions begin with a relatively long and acyclic alap, where the syllables of the following mantra is recited :.
The alap gradually unfolds into more rhythmic jod and jhala sections.
These sections are followed by a rendition of bandish, with the pakhawaj as an accompaniment.
The great Indian musician Tansen sang in the dhrupad style.
A lighter form of dhrupad, called dhamar, is sung primarily during the festival of Holi.
Other leading exponents include the Gundecha Brothers, who have received training from some of the Dagars.
Bishnupur Gharana, based in West Bengal, is a key school that has been propagating this style of singing since Mughal times.
Khyal is a Hindustani form of vocal music, adopted from medieval Persian music and based on Dhrupad.
Khyal, literally meaning thought or imagination in Hindustani, is unusual as it is based on improvising and expressing emotion.
A Khyal is a two - to eight-line lyric set to a melody.
The lyric is of an emotional account possibly from poetic observation.
Khyal contains a greater variety embellishments and ornamentations compared to dhrupad.
Khyal s romanticism has led to it becoming to most popular genre of Hindustani classical music.
The singer improvises and finds inspiration within the raga to depict the Khyal.
Many argue that Amir Khusrau created the style in the late 16th century.
This form was popularized by Mughal Emperor Mohammad Shah, through his court musicians.
Some well-known composers of this period were Sadarang, Adarang, and Manrang.
They consist of a few lines of poetry with soft syllables or bols set to a tune.
The singer uses these few lines as a basis for fast improvisation.
The tillana of Carnatic music is based on the tarana, although the former is primarily associated with dance.
Tappa is a form of Indian semi-classical vocal music whose specialty is its rolling pace based on fast, subtle, knotty construction.
Nidhubabur Tappa, or tappas sung by Nidhu Babu were very popular in 18th and 19th-century Bengal.
Among the living performers of this style are Laxmanrao Pandit, Shamma Khurana, Manvalkar, Girija Devi, Ishwarchandra Karkare, and Jayant Khot.
Thumri is a semi-classical vocal form said to have begun in Uttar Pradesh with the court of Nawab Wajid Ali Shah,.
There are three types of thumri : poorab ang, Lucknavi and Punjabi thumri.
The lyrics are typically in a proto-Hindi language called Brij Bhasha and are usually romantic.
Ghazal is an originally Persian form of poetry.
Ghazal exists in multiple variations, including semi-classical, folk and pop forms.
Although Hindustani music clearly is focused on the vocal performance, instrumental forms have existed since ancient times.
A number of musical instruments are associated with Hindustani classical music.
Other plucked or struck string instruments include the surbahar, sursringar, santoor, and various versions of the slide guitar.
Among bowed instruments, the sarangi, esraj and violin are popular.
The bansuri, shehnai and harmonium are important wind instruments.
In the percussion ensemble, the tabla and the pakhavaj are the most popular.
Various other instruments have also been used in varying degrees.
Kamala Shankar was born in 1966 in the Tanjore district of Tamil Nadu.
She is a Hindustani classical guitar player.
Shankar is the first woman to have been awarded a doctorate in guitar.
Dr Kamala Shankar has been awarded the Indias National Award in Music titled Rashtriya Kumar Gandharva Samman.
In this, Shankar is no exception.
Her model, the Shankar guitar, is made from a single block of wood, with thicker walls and no sound hole.
It has four melody strings, four chikari and 12 taraf.
The guitar is named after Shankar Bhagwan.
Shankar calls it a modified version of the Hawaiian guitar.
Meend over Matter, The Music Magazine, 7 January 2002.
Rahim Fahimuddin Dagar.
Rahim Fahimuddin Dagar was an exponent of Dagar vani Dhrupad of Indian classical music.
He represented the 19th generation of Dagar Tradition.
He and his brothers Nasir Moinuddin Dagar and Nasir Aminuddin Dagar were known as the Senior Dagar Brothers.
Similarly, Nasir Zahiruddin and Nasir Faiyazuddin Dagar were known as the Junior Dagar Brothers.
His other brothers were Zia Mohiuddin Dagar, Fariduddin Dagar, and Hussain Sayeeduddin Dagar.
In his words,  this included full mastery over the 52 alankaars, Nada Yoga, Rudra Veena, Sanskrit education and of course Dhrupad-Dhamar.
He studied Rudra Veena from his uncle Ustad Ziauddin Khan Dagar for twelve years.
He also took occasional lessons from his other uncles Ustad Hussainuddin Khan Dagar and Ustad Imamuddin Khan Dagar.
He learnt sanskrit from his father and Pt.
The singer has to portray its kalatmak, vidyatmak and adhyatmak aspects to do proper justice to it.
His recordings have been released in Switzerland, Germany and Italy.
Ustad Rahim Fahimuddin Khan Dagar has been honoured with various awards, including :.
He was the father of Vilayat Khan, one of the topmost sitariyas of the postwar period.
Enayat Khan was born in Uttar Pradesh into a family of musicians.
He married Basiran Bibi, daughter of khyal singer Bande Hussain.
For example, he standardised its physical dimensions and added the upper resonator gourd, which is very popular with todays players.
Nobel laureate Rabindranath Tagore was a musical collaborator and personal friend.
Enayat Khan died young, with four children.
His two sons, Vilayat Khan and Imrat, were trained in the Imdadkhani style by other members of his extended family.
Vilayat learned the sitar and Imrat the surbahar ; both were to become very famous classical musicians.
, page 21.
Vamanrao Deshpande was a famous music critic, musicologist and a prolific author on the subject of Indian Classical Music.
He shunned the concert stage, but performed regularly on the All India Radio, Bombay, from 1932 to 1985.
In addition, he was connected with many musical institutions in various capacities.
He is the author of Maharashtras Contribution to Music.
His Marathi book Gharandaj Gayaki won the Maharashtra State Award for the best work in aesthetic criticism in 1962.
It is recommended reading in the music syllabi of many educational institutions across the country.
His next book, Alapini also received the Maharashtra State Award.
It has been translated into a number of languages, including in English, under the title Between Two Tanpuras.
He and his friend Professor Deodhar are known to have started a new trend in music criticism.
Vamanrao Deshpande was for many years closely associated with stalwart musicians, including Pt.
Kumar Gandharva, Pt.
Bhimsen Joshi, Smt.
Kishori Amonkar among many others.
He also acted as mentor and guide to many upcoming musicians of the time.
His son Satyasheel Deshpande is also a famous singer and musicologist.
Farrukh Fateh Ali Khan.
Farrukh Fateh Ali Khan was a member of a well-known family of Qawwali musicians.
Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan was the leader of the family Qawwali party from 1971 until his death in 1997.
Farrukh Fateh Ali Khan was one of only two people who remained members of the party throughout this period.
Farrukh played the lead harmonium, and provided accompanying vocals.
While accompanying Nusrat to England, he became widely known as Harmonium Raj Sahib.
His talents and accomplishments often went unrecognized due to playing in the shadow of Nusrat.
He is credited as such in some of the albums by the group, such as Shahenshah.
Farrukh Fateh Ali Khan died on September 9, 2003.
Abdul Karim Khan.
Ustad Abdul Karim Khan, was an Indian classical singer of the Kirana Gharana.
Early life and background.
His father, Kale Khan was the grandson of Ghulam Ali.
Karim Khan received training under uncle Abdulla Khan and father Kale Khan.
He also received guidance from another uncle Nanhe Khan.
Apart from vocals and sarangi, he also learnt Veena, Sitar and Tabla.
In early years he used to sing with his brother Abdul Haq.
Baroda ruler was impressed by this singing duo and made them the court musicians.
When they decided to get married, they were ousted from Baroda.
The couple settled down in Bombay.
Karim Khans first wife, Gafooran was the sister of another Kirana master Abdul Wahid Khan, who was also his cousin.
In particular the singing of his Sargam was a direct influence of Carnatic practice.
He became a frequent visitor to Mysore Darbar which conferred on him the title Sangeet Ratna.
In 1913 he founded the Arya Sangeet Vidyalaya in Poona to teach students.
He would wholeheartedly teach all his students unlike other family ustads of the era.
He finally settled down in Miraj till his death in 1937 when returning from a concert tour of the south.
Every year in August commemorative music concerts are held in Miraj.
The innovations he brought to his vocal style distinguishes Kirana style from others.
The slow melodic development of the raga in Vilambit laya slow tempo was the most characteristic aspect of his music.
He worked hard to maintain his voice to be sweet and melodious which shaped his music.
The thumri style he developed as also quite different from the Poorab ang or Punjabi ang.
His thumri progresses in a leisurely languor with ample abandonment.
He has even recorded a Thyagaraja Krithi.
He was also influenced by Rehmet Khan of the Gwalior gharana and adopted the direct style of presentation.
Inayat Hussain Khan.
Ustad Inayat Hussain Khan was an Indian classical vocalist, and the founder of Rampur-Sahaswan gharana.
Born in Sahaswan, Badaun district to Ustad Mehboob Khan, a khayal singer and Veena player of the Rampur court.
He was trained and lived in Rampur, and his gharana came to be called Rampur-Sahaswan gharana.
He was a child prodigy.
Ustad Bundu Khan was born in Delhi in a family of musicians.
He received his early training in sarangi from his father Ali Jan Khan and later from his uncle Mamman Khan.
He was awarded the Pride of Performance by the Government of Pakistan in 1985.
His sons Umrao Bundu Khan and Buland Khan have continued his musical tradition.
Girija Devi is an Indian classical singer of the Banaras gharana.
She performs classical and light classical music and has helped elevate the profile of thumri.
Girija Devi was born in Varanasi, on May 8 1929.
Devi agreed not to perform privately for others, but gave her first public concert in Bihar in 1951.
Devi often toured and continues to perform in 2009.
Her repertoire includes the semi-classical genres kajri, chaiti, and holi and she sings khyal, Indian folk music, and tappa.
Devi is considered as Queen Of Thumri.
Devi has received many more awards in which some are :.
Ustad Tanrus Khan was a founder of the Hindustani musical tradition of Delhi gharana.
He was court musician and teacher to the last Mughal emperor Bahadur Shah Zafar II.
A dhun is a light instrumental piece in Hindustani classical music.
Although it may be played in a raga, or mode, it is more freely interpreted and may incorporate foreign notes.
A dhun may be based on a folk tune or a religious, bhajan - type song, or even a filmi song.
Pandit Suman Ghosh is an Indian classical vocalist.
Suman Ghosh began training at the age of 7 under the guidance of his mother Monika Ghosh.
Suman Ghosh started his concerts by 16.
He also performed at the annual music festival, Pandit Motiram Pandit Maniram Sangeet Samaroh, organised by Pandit Jasraj.
Pandit Ghosh then taught at Pandit Jasrajs School of Music branch in Tampa, Florida.
He then proceeded and started his own school in Houston, Texas.
Pandit Ghosh currently teaches in Sugar Land and the Woodlands.
Awards and recognition.
In 2008, Pandit Jasraj bestowed the title of Acharya Varishtha.
Pandit Damodar Hota is an Indian classical musician based in Odisha, India.
He is an exponent of Hindustani classical music as well as classical Odissi music.
An A Grade Artist of Doordarshan and All India Radio, he exemplifies the traditional singing style of the Gwalior Gharana.
He is a disciple of Padmashree Nada Maharishi Pt.
Balwant Rai Bhatt and Sangeet Martand Pt.
His compositions bear the pen name  Swar Rang.
Pandit Hota was a student scholar of the Odisha Sangeet Natak Academy.
Balwant Rai Bhatt and Pt.
For his Doctor Of Music degree, he was awarded the prestigious Pandit Mirashi Buwa Puraskar.
Pandit Hota holds Madhyama Purna in Tabla and Visharad in Pakhawaj.
He served as Senior Lecturer of Hindustani Vocal Music and Principal at Utkal Sangeet Mahavidyalaya.
Pandit Hota has been teaching music in the gurukul tradition since 1963.
He is the founder and chief guru of Swar Rang, an institution of Hindustani Classical and Uddra Padhatiya Sangeet.
The music society he founded organises frequent classical music programs.
Kishore Chandrananda Champu Lahari.
Udra Paddhattiya Mela Raga Tala Laksyana.
Laksyna - o - Swar Malika Lahari -LCB- PART 1 -RCB-.
Srimandira Sangeeta Mala -LCB- PART 2 -RCB-.
Sangeet Shashtra -LCB- PART 1 -RCB-.
Bharatiya Sangeeta Ra Itihasa -LCB- PART 1 -RCB-.
Udra Paddhattiya Sangeet -LCB- PART 2 -RCB-.
Udra Paddhattiya Mela Raga Tala - o - Pravandha Laksyana -LCB- PART 1 -RCB-.
Rageshree is a Hindustani classical raga, from the Khamaj thaat.
Sipra Bose was a noted singer in the Hindustani classical music tradition from Kolkata, India.
She is noted for her rendering of light classical songs in Bengali.
She also worked with Naina Devi of the Benaras gharana and Pandit Ravi Shankar.
Her ghazal renditions, especially her enunciation of Urdu, has been noted by critics.
She died from a heart attack in Kolkata on April 22, 2008.
Her husband is Gobindo Bose, a noted Tabla player.
They have two sons and one daughter.
The Jaipur-Atrauli gharana is a Khayal - based stylized singing family-hood, founded by Utd.
Alladiya Khan in the late 19th century.
Kesarbai Kerkar, Smt.
Mogubai Kurdikar and Pt.
The founder of this gharana, Utd.
Four major Gharanas are recognized in Hindustani Classical Khayal music : Gwalior, Agra, Kirana and Jaipur-Atrauli.
Others are less pervasive, but no less enchanting, such as Indore, Rampur, Mewati, Patiala, and Bhendi-Bazar.
This Gharana mainly evolved from Dagar-bani of Dhrupad, however it also absorbed finer essence of Gauhar-bani and Khandar-bani.
The great musician composer Swami Haridas was also born in this family and the great Tansen and Baiju were his pupils.
Natthu Khan and Mantol Khan were two stalwarts of this Gharana, four to five generations down the line.
They imbibed the practices of both Hindu and Muslim traditions.
His compositions praise Mahadev and Allah with equal fervor.
After establishing himself in the north, Utd.
Alladiya Khan migrated to the court of Shahu Maharaj in Kolhapur and became his court musician.
The young Alladiya Khan was closely associated with Wazir Khan binkar at Indore and Bombay.
The Meend of his gayaki can be traced to this influence.
Today, only the Khayal tradition remains.
He was known to have been greatly influenced by Utd.
Mubarak Khans style that blended the Swar and Taal aspects of khayal singing for the first time.
Jaipur-Atrauli Gharana Gayaki.
Instead of the flat taan, gamak makes the taan spiral into seemingly never-ending cycles.
Meend in aalap and gamak in taan are the hallmark of this gayaki.
Sharp edged harkats and murkis are relatively uncommon.
No other gharana has paid so much attention to the esthetics and laykaari in singing bol-alaaps and bol-taans.
Specialty and Jod Raags.
A highlight of Jaipur gayaki is the mastery over Jod Raags.
Singers from other Gharanas tend to sing one Raag in Aaroh and the other in Avaroh.
Alternatively, they may sing alternate phrases of the two component Raags.
The listener hears an amalgam of both raags without losing their distinctive identity.
Trying to imbibe all these characteristics without losing the aesthetics is a tall order for any musician.
Hence this Gayaki is called a thinking listeners or connoisseurs Gayaki.
Alladiya Khan purposefully teaching students to approach the same musical content differently, causing internal quarrels within the Gharana itself, as well.
As a result, scholars feel the purity of the Jaipur-Atrauli Gharana can be traced from Utd.
Alladiya Khan to his brother Utd.
Haider Ali Khan, to his sons Utd.
Manji Khan and Utd.
Bhurji Khan and his grandson Ut Azizuddin Khan, as well as Utd.
Gulubhai Jasdanwalla, the only purist outside of the Utd.
Alladiya Khan family.
Riwaayat earlier Riwaayat-e-Maihar is a classical music event which sticks to the classical form of rendition.
The group belongs to Maihar gharana.
The event features fine artistes who still practice the traditional way of rendering music.
Riwaayat meaning Tradition in Urdu, started in 2010 in Hyderabad at Hyderabad Central University, S.N.School of Performing Arts & Communication.
The event was held on the 9 and 10 December 2011 at Vidyaranya High School, Hyderabad.
Shubhendra Rao is an Indian sitarist.
Rao was born in Bangalore, India to N. R. Rama Rao, a sitarist.
Like his father, N. R. Rama Rao, Shubhendra Rao is a disciple of the sitarist Ravi Shankar.
In addition to solo performances, Rao also performs as a duo with his wife, the Dutch cellist Saskia Rao-de Haas.
He performed at the Dover Lane music festival in 2009.
He has toured the United States, Canada, Europe, and many Asian nations.
Emily Robison is an American songwriter, singer, multi-instrumentalist, and a founding member of the female country band the Dixie Chicks.
Robison plays banjo, dobro, guitar, bass, mandolin, accordion, and sitar.
Emily Erwin was born in Pittsfield, Massachusetts.
Emily responded by mastering the five string banjo, by reading books to teach herself the chord progressions.
From 1984-1989, Jane Frost, , remembers watching the sisters mature, teaming up with schoolmates Troy and Sharon Gilchrist.
The sisters were said to have an almost obsessive interest in busking at small venues and attending bluegrass festivals.
Martie felt they could do well.
Robison was shy, and the youngest member of the group.
By 1993, the band had evolved into a new direction.
Macy left the group for a purer bluegrass sound.
Robison commented, We were prepared to pay our dues for as long as it took ; we were prepared for longevity.
Robison and Maguires instrumental virtuosity set the Chicks apart from many other country acts, male and female.
Robisons songwriting has also been a factor in the Chicks recording career.
Court Yard Hounds.
When Robisons marriage came to an end, she began expressing herself by songwriting.
After four years, Robison became angry and frustrated, and in sending her new songs to her sister, conveyed her increasing disappointment.
The band made their live debut in March at South by Southwest with an album released in May, 2010.
Robison wrote all but one of the songs on their album.
On May 1, 1999, Emily married country singer Charlie Robison.
Emily and Charlie divorced on August 6, 2008 after nine years of marriage.
Robison and her then-boyfriend, Martin Strayer, have a daughter, Violet Isabel Strayer, born on September 4, 2012.
Robison and Strayer are now married.
Chhote Rahimat Khan.
It is this inimitable legacy that gives his music a unique and distinctive colour, rarely experienced in modern music circles.
Recognition and achievements.
He is a regular artist on AIR Dharwad and AIR Panaji, Goa.
He is also a music director.
Besides many concerts in India, he has performed in the UK, Portugal, China, France, Finland, Malaysia and Singapore.
ITC SRA Sangeet Sammelan.
The first ITC Sangeet Sammelan was held in 1971.
She has performed sensational tabla solos and has accompanied some of the best musicians of India such as Pt.
Shivkumar Sharma, Pt.
Hariprasad Chaurasia, Ustad Zakir Hussain, Smt.
Girija Devi, Ustad Amjad Ali Khan, Ustad Sultan Khan, Ustad Shahid Parvez, Pt.
She has also performed with renowned international musicians.
She has also composed music for short films, documentaries, theatre and other commissioned work and events.
Anuradha was invited as an artist-in-residence, at the New England Conservatory and Berkeley School of Music.
Awards and media recognition.
Pal has received several awards.
Doordarshan National Archives featured her in a film titled Woman of Substance in 2006.
Times Now channel featured her in a documentary titled All About Her in 2004.
Films Division of India featured her in the documentary titled Aaj ki Nari in 1999.
Anuradha Pal resides in Mumbai.
Shruti Sadolikar Katkar is an Indian classical singer of the khyal style in the Jaipur-Atrauli gharana.
She is a recipient of the Sangeet Natak Akademi Award for Hindustani vocal music for 2011.
Early life and career.
Sadolikar was born 1951 into a family from Kolhapur which was known for its musical tradition and owning sugar mills.
She received training in Indian classical music from childhood.
Sadolikar has regularly performed playback for Indian movies.
She had Katkar added to her name after marriage and is a student of Azizuddin Khan, son of Burji Khan.
Sadolikar works as Vice Chancellor of the Bhatkhande Music Institute University in Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh.
Zia Mohiuddin Dagar.
He was largely responsible for the revival of the rudra vina as a solo concert instrument.
Early life and choice of veena.
He was trained both in vocals and in the rudra veena, an instrument used by vocalists to practice melodies.
Struggles and hardships.
After India gained independence the princely states were abolished.
The Dagar family lost the patronage of the court of Udaipur, and had to seek employment elsewhere.
Finally they arrived in Mumbai.
They did not have a tanpura, sitar, or veena, let alone a house.
There was much cynicism about dhrupad, as his son Bahauddin Mohiuddin Dagar recounted in an interview.
Wholl listen ?.
Rudra veena ?.
Play something else.
Long alaaps ?.
So boring !.
In 1990, Ustad ji was awarded the Kalidas Samman, one of Indias most prestigious awards, by the Madhya Pradesh government.
Establishment of the Dhrupad Gurukul.
Established in 1982.
The concept of making a Gurukul was entirely Ustad Zia Mohiuddin Dagars.
He envisioned a place where he would sit with his disciple and.
Ustad Zia Mohiuddin Dagar died in 1990.
Sanjeev Chimmalgi is an Indian Hindustani vocalist.
He is a disciple of the revered guru, Pandit C. R. Vyas.
Sanjeev Chimmalgi was born in Mumbai to M.V. Chimmalgi, in a family hailing from Dharwad, Karnataka.
His grandfather, Chimmalgi Master, was a noted tabla player.
He is professionally trained as a Computer engineer.
Sanjeev Chimmalgi had his initial training from Pandit Madhava Gudi.
Later he came under the tutelage of late Pandit C R Vyas.
He has performed at several venues in Mumbai, Pune, Indore, Kolkata, Miraj, Nagpur, etc.
Bhajan Sopori is an Indian instrumentalist.
He is a player of santoor, an ancient stringed musical instrument.
Sopori hails from Sopore in Kashmir Valley and traces his lineage to ancient Santoor experts.
He belongs to the Sufiana gharana of Indian classical music.
His family has played santoor for over six generations.
Soporis son Abhay Rustum Sopori is also a santoor player.
Both father and son have given several performances together.
Pandit Bhajan Sopori has taught music at Washington University, US.
The academy has trained several musicians and revived old instruments.
It was presented the state government dogri award in 2011.
Sopori was awarded the Sangeet Natak Akademi Award in 1993 and the Padma Shri in 2004.
In 2009 he was honoured with the Baba Allaudin Khan Award.
He was also awarded the M N Mathur award in 2011 for his contribution to Indian classical music.
Hori is a genre of semi-classical singing, popular in Uttar Pradesh and Bihar.
It can be adorned with a Bhairavi, Thumri etc.
Satyaki Banerjee is an Indian Bengali composer.
He is a part of an Anglo-Bengali band with members in Kolkata and London.
He plays instruments like Dotara and sarod give his performance on both classical and folk.
He studied the sarod with the late Pandit Dipak Chowdhury and now trains under Pandit Tejendra Narayan Majumdar.
Satyaki is a historian by training and takes serious academic interest in the music he practices.
Chatur Lal was an Indian tabla player.
Chatur Lal was born 1925 in Udaipur, Rajasthan.
Lal died October 1965.
Ustad Akhtar Sadmani was a Indian classical vocalist.
Early life and background.
Akhtar Sadmani was born in Dhaka, but was brought up in Calcutta.
It was his father who introduced him to music.
At the age of ten, he received initial training from Bobby Daniel, a student of Zamiruddin Khan.
In 1955, Bobby Daniel took him to the renowned musician Omar Khan, who continued his training.
In 1957, Omar Khan personally introduced Akhtar Sadmani to Amir Khan.
Since then he received training and advice from Amir Khan as well.
In 1961, Akhtar Sadmani returned to Bangladesh and joined Radio Pakistan a year later as an artist.
He became a Music Director in Radio Bangladesh in 1966.
In 1980 he established the  Sur Rang Academy of Classical Music.
The academy was the first of its kind in Bangladesh, solely devoted to Indian classical music.
Akhtar Sadmani suffered a severe heart-attack and died on 30 December 2003.
Raga Bhoopeshwari is a rare Hindustani Classical Raga.
The Raga in not one of the traditional ragas of Hindustani Classical Music being sung for the past few centuries.
It has been developed within the last few decades.
The birth of this raga is something that eluded most people for a while.
It was believed that the raga was created by Ustad Alladiya Khan of the Jaipur-Atrauli Gharana.
However the time frame of Ustadjis lifetime and the ragas emergence do not match.
It is now however certain, that the raga was created by Pt.
Mani Prasad of the Kirana Gharana.
Apart from who created the raga, a major issue that arises is, how was it created ?.
Being an audav raga, Raga Bhoopeshwari leads to a lot of ambiguity.
Since the remaining notes/swars are unknown, it is quite difficult to determine the parent raga or scale of Bhoopeshwari.
The raga does not fit into any of Bhatkhande s thats and so its origin is uncertain.
A similar problem persists in Carnatic Music as well.
People associate it with the Melakarta Chakravam, Melakart Mararanjani, Melakarta Charukesi and even Melakarta Sarasangi, but no one is absolutely certain.
Another matter of concern with the raga is its name.
The name Bhoopeshwari had an obvious inspiration from Raga Bhopali.
However, the raga has various names across India.
Hariprasad Chaurasia, the legendary flutist, prefers the name Raga Bhoopkali, while most of the Jaipur-Atrauli Gharana musicians use Raga Prateeksha.
Other variations such as Bhoopeshri, Bhoopshri etc. are also present.
In Carnatic Music, the raga is called Raga Vaasanthi.
Despite its complex origin and nomenclature, the raga isnt a very difficult one to sing.
It has the same notes as Raga Bhopali / Deshkar, but instead of the shuddha Dha, uses a komal Dha.
Arohana : Sa Re Ga Pa dha Sa.
Avarohan : Sa dha Pa Ga Re Sa.
Vadi is Pa and Samvadi is Sa.
The Raga is a morning raga.
However, it has started being used in film music, light classcial music and ghazals.
Some of the most notable performances of Raga Bhoopeshwari are :.
Ramashreya Jha was a distinguished composer, musician, scholar and teacher of Hindustani Classical music.
He was the Head of the Department of Music in Allahabad University from 1980 to 1989.
He was known for his deep knowledge, creative genius and his gifts as a teacher.
His five-volume anthology Abhinava Geetanjali ranks high among the most influential works in Hindustani music.
It contains critical analysis of ragas supplemented by numerous traditional and self-conceived compositions.
He is popularly known to musicians, students and music lovers around India by his nom de plume ` Ramrang.
His name is also spelled Ram Ashray Jha.
This move by the University was in recognition of genuine merit because Ramrang held no formal college degrees.
He retired from his active professorial duties in 1989.
In 2005, Ramrang received the Sangeet Natak Akademi Award from Sangeet Natak Akademi, Indias National Academy for Music, Dance and Drama.
Ramrang died January 1, 2009, in Kolkata, India, due to complications following heart surgery.
Among his well-known disciples are Kamla Bose, Shubha Mudgal and Geeta Banerjee.
Lalith J. Rao.
Lalith J. Rao is an Indian classical singer and a representative of the Agra gharana.
She started learning music from Rama Rao Naik, who initiated her into the Agra gharana style of singing.
Raos first public concert was at the Bangalore Sangeet Sabha at the age of 12.
Rao completed her Bachelors and Masters in Electrical Communication Engineering, the latter from the University of New Brunswick.
In 1967, she married Jayavanth Rao and moved to Delhi to work.
She is as adept at singing khyal, dhrupad, dhamar, as well as thumri, tarana and hori.
Under the guidance of her ustad, Rao developed a unique style of rendering taranas.
Her first concert abroad was in 1981.
She has performed in France, UK, US and Canada and is a top-grade artiste of All India Radio.
Rao regularly performs on the Radio and Television.
She was the chief coordinator for the Ford Foundation Archival project at the ITC Sangeet Research Academy from 1989-91.
Few years later she herself sang for the Ethno-Musicology Department of the University of Washington in Seattle.
for them to archive the music of her Agra gharana.
She lives and teaches music in Bangalore.
Madhya laya or Madhyalaya is a medium tempo of a rhythm in Indian classical music.
It can be compared to the ticking of about a second of the clock.
Taals used in madhya laya include Jhaptal, Teental, Tilwada, Rupak and Keherwa.
Rupak Tala is a popular tala in Hindustani music that is common in Bhajans and Geets.
It has seven matras in three vibhags.
Unlike the popular Tintal, the vibhags of Rupak Tala are not of equal length.
Also, both the khali and taali of Rupak Tala fall on the first matra.
The aavaratan of Rupak Tala has three vibhags.
The first vibhag has three matras and both the second and third vibhags have two matras.
Sam is on the first matra of the first vibhag.
The aavaratan of Rupak Tala may be written as follows :.
Each number is a whole matra of equal length.
Clap & wave.
Using the Clap & Wave system can be problematic for Rupak Tala.
Traditionally one claps on sam, or taali, and waves on khali.
The first matra of Rupak Tala, however, is both taali and khali.
There a numerous examples of Rupak Tala that differ based upon the instrument used.
The following examples apply for the tabla.
The most common theka for Rupak tala contains the bols Tin, Na, and Dhin.
This theka is composed in the following manner by gautam dayal.
Tin Tin Na | Dhin Na | Dhin Na.
Prakars are fairly open to the individual performers flair.
That being said, however, the following is an example of three common Rupak Tala prakars.
Tin Tin Na | Dhin NaNa | Dhin NaNa.
Tin Tin Na | Dha Dha Tirkit | Dha Dha Tirkit.
Tin Tin Nana | Dhirkt NaNa | Dhirkt NaNa.
Tin Tin Nana | Dhirkt tktk | Dhirkt tktk.
Ti Ti na | Dina | Dina.
A tihai for Rupak Tala must begin on either the third or the sixth matra to end on sam.
The following is an example of a simple tihai for Rupak Tala that begins on matra three.
X X Tr | kt Tr | kt Tr.
Da X X | X X | X X.
Ravi Shankar discography.
Ravi Shankar had numerous solo recordings published, including :.
Dr Usha Parkhi is a Hindustani vocalist from Nagpur.
She started learning under D G alias Bhayyaji Vazalwar.
Usha Parkhi has a doctorate in music from Gandharva Mahavidyalaya.
She used to perform in concerts even in her early seventies.
She has been a reputed music teacher in Nagpur.
Pandit Ajoy Chakrabarty is an Indian Hindustani classical vocalist.
He belongs to the Patiala gharana.
Chakrabarty was born in Kolkata, Bengal to Ajit Chakrabarty in a Hindu Brahmin family.
They moved to India from his homeland, Bangladesh during the partition and raised his two sons in Shyamnagar.
His younger brother, Sanjay Chakrabarty is a noted composer and music therapist.
Chakrabarty was a disciple of Ustad Munawar Ali Khan.
He is also a first class graduate from the Rabindra Bharati University.
Chakrabarty showed extraordinary promise in vocal music and at the age of three, began taking lessons from his father Ajit Chakrabarty.
He is notable for imagination and sensitivity to lyrics, coupled with his uncanny sense of rhythm.
He founded and runs the Shrutinandan music academy.
Ajoy Chakrabarty is married and his daughter, Kaushiki Chakrabarty is also an upcoming talent of Hindustani classical music.
Nico was born Christa Paffgen in Cologne.
When she was two years old, she moved with her mother and grandfather to the Spreewald forest outside of Berlin.
In 1946, Nico and her mother relocated to downtown Berlin, where Nico worked as a seamstress.
According to conflicting accounts, Nico was raped by a member of the U.S. Air Force when she was 15.
Nicos song Secret Side from the album The End makes oblique references to the rape.
Acting and modeling.
Tobias named her this after his friend, filmmaker Nikos Papatakis.
She soon moved to Paris and began working for Vogue, Tempo, Vie Nuove, Mascotte Spettacolo, Camera, Elle, and other fashion magazines.
Through her travels, she learned to speak English, Spanish, and French.
After appearing in several television advertisements, Nico got a small role in Alberto Lattuada s film La Tempesta.
She also appeared in Rudolph Mate s For the First Time, with Mario Lanza, later that year.
By this time, she was living in New York and taking acting classes with Lee Strasberg.
She appears as the cover model on jazz pianist Bill Evans 1962 album, Moon Beams.
After splitting her time between New York and Paris, she got the lead role in Jacques Poitrenaud s Strip-Tease.
Delon always denied his paternity.
The child was raised mostly by Delons mother and her husband and eventually was adopted by them, taking their surname, Boulogne.
The Velvet Underground.
Actor Ben Carruthers introduced her to Bob Dylan in Paris that summer.
In 1967 Nico recorded his song Ill Keep It with Mine for her first album, Chelsea Girl.
When Warhol began managing The Velvet Underground he proposed that the group take on Nico as a chanteuse.
They consented reluctantly, for both personal and musical reasons.
The group became the centerpiece of Warhols Exploding Plastic Inevitable, a multimedia performance featuring music, light, film and dance.
Nicos tenure in the Velvet Underground was marked by personal and musical difficulties.
Nicos partial deafness also would sometimes cause her to veer off key, for which she was ridiculed by other band members.
The album went on to become timeless in legend.
Early solo career.
For her debut album, 1967s Chelsea Girl, she recorded songs by Bob Dylan, Tim Hardin and Jackson Browne, among others.
Nico was not satisfied with the album and had little say in production matters.
I asked for drums, they said no.
I asked for more guitars, they said no.
And I asked for simplicity, and they covered it in flutes !.
They added strings, and -- I didnt like them, but I could live with them.
But the flute !.
The first time I heard the album, I cried and it was all because of the flute.
In California, Nico spent time with Jim Morrison of The Doors.
Morrison encouraged Nico to write her own songs.
She would later refer to him as her soul brother.
For The Marble Index, released in 1969, Nico wrote the lyrics and music.
Accompaniment mainly centered around Nicos harmonium, while John Cale added an array of folk and classical instruments, and arranged the album.
The harmonium became her signature instrument for the rest of her career.
The album has a classical-cum-European folk sound.
A promotional film for the song Evening of Light was filmed by Francois de Menil.
This video featured the now red-haired Nico and Iggy Pop of The Stooges.
1972 saw a one-off live reunion of Nico, Cale and Lou Reed at Bataclan in Paris.
Nico released two more solo albums in the 1970s, Desertshore and The End.
Nico wrote the music, sang, and played the harmonium.
Cale produced and played most of the other instruments on both albums.
The End ... featured Brian Eno on synthesizer and Phil Manzanera on guitar, both from Roxy Music.
She appeared at the Rainbow Theatre, in London, with Cale, Eno, and Kevin Ayers.
The album June 1, 1974 was the result of this.
Nico performed a version of the Doors The End, which was the catalyst for The End ... later that year.
Between 1970 and 1979, Nico made about seven films with French director Philippe Garrel.
She met Garrel in 1969 and contributed the song The Falconer to his film Le Lit de la Vierge.
Soon after, she was living with Garrel and became a central figure in his cinematic and personal circles.
Nicos first acting appearance with Garrel occurred in his 1972 film, La Cicatrice Interieure.
Nico also supplied the music for this film and collaborated closely with the director.
His 1991 film Jentends Plus la Guitare is dedicated to Nico.
On 13 December 1974, Nico opened for Tangerine Dream s infamous concert at Reims Cathedral in Reims, France.
The Roman Catholic Church denounced these actions, ordered the rededication of the cathedral and banned future performances on church property.
Around this time, Nico became involved with German musician Lutz Ulbrich, guitarist for Ash Ra Tempel.
Ulbrich would accompany Nico on guitar at many of her subsequent concerts through the rest of the decade.
This would be Nicos public image from then on.
Nico and Island Records allegedly had many disputes during this time, and in 1975 the label dropped her from their roster.
Later solo career.
In February 1978, Nico performed at the Canet Roc 78 festival in Spain.
Also performing at this event were Blondie, Kevin Ayers, and Ultravox.
She read excerpts from Ulalume by Edgar Allan Poe.
She said that was deeply moved by the music, so she couldnt help to make a contribution.
In 1978, Nico briefly toured as supporting act for Siouxsie & The Banshees, one of many punk bands who admired Nico.
In Paris, Patti Smith bought a new harmonium for Nico after her original was stolen.
Other fans of Nico included John Lydon, Dave Vanian, and Tommy Gear.
Nico returned to New York in 1979 where her comeback concert at CBGB was reviewed postitively in The New York Times.
She began playing regularly at the Squat Theatre and other venues with Jim Tisdall accompanying her on harp and Gittler guitar.
They played together on a sold-out tour of twelve cities in the East and Midwest.
At some shows, she was accompanied on guitar by Cheetah Chrome.
In France, Nico was introduced to photographer Antoine Giacomoni.
Giacomonis photos of Nico would be used for her next album, and would eventually be featured in a book.
Through Antoine Giacomoni, she met Corsican bassist Philippe Quilichini.
Nico recorded her next studio album, Drama of Exile, in 1981.
produced by Philippe Quilichini.
Mahamad Hadi aka Mad Sheer Khan played oriental rock guitar and wrote all the oriental production.
It was a departure from her earlier work with John Cale, featuring a mixture of rock and Middle Eastern arrangements.
Uniquely, Drama Of Exile was released twice.
The second version appeared in 1983.
These bands included Blue Orchids, The Bedlamites and The Faction.
In 1981, Nico released the Philippe Quilichini-produced single Saeta/Vegas on Flicknife Records.
The following year saw another single, Procession produced by Martin Hannett and featuring The Invisible Girls.
Included on the Procession single was a new version of The Velvet Underground s All Tomorrows Parties.
At Salford University in 1982, Nico would join Bauhaus for a performance of  I 'm Waiting For The Man.
That same year, Nicos supporting acts included The Sisters Of Mercy and Gene Loves Jezebel.
In September 1982, Nico performed at the Deeside Leisure Centre for the Futurama Festival.
The live compilation Do Or Die !.
She recorded her final solo album, Camera Obscura, in 1985, with The Faction.
Produced by John Cale, it featured Nicos version of the Richard Rodgers / Lorenz Hart song My Funny Valentine.
The albums closing song was an updated version of Konig, which she had previously recorded for La cicatrice interieure.
This was the only song on the album to feature only Nicos voice and harmonium.
A music video for My Heart Is Empty was filmed at The Fridge in Brixton.
The next few years saw frequent live performances by Nico, with tours of Europe, Japan and Australia.
A duet called Your Kisses Burn with singer Marc Almond was her last studio recording.
It was released a few months after her death on Almonds album The Stars We Are.
Nicos final recording was of her last concert, Fata Morgana, at the Berlin Planetarium on the 6th June 1988.
This was a special event created by Lutz Ulbrich and featured a number of new compositions by Nico and The Faction.
As an encore, Nico performed a song from The End ...,  You Forget To Answer.
A CD of this concert was released in 1994 and again in 2012.
Delon denied paternity and Nico had difficulty raising Ari, so the boy was raised by Delons parents.
Ari became a photographer and actor, and had a son in 1999.
She led a nomadic life, living in different countries.
During the final years of her life, she was based around the Prestwich and Salford area of Greater Manchester.
Although she was still struggling with addiction, she became interested in music again.
She shared an apartment in Brixton, London, for a few months in the mid-80s with punk poet John Cooper Clark.
Nico was a heroin addict for over 15 years.
Nico was described by some friends and colleagues as a racist.
She had a definite Nordic Aryan streak, belief that she was physically, spiritually and creatively superior.
According to Fields, she once attacked a mixed-race woman in a restaurant with a smashed wineglass, saying I hate black people.
Nico was deaf in one ear, which made it difficult for her to hear what others were saying.
A passing taxi driver found her unconscious, and he had difficulty getting her admitted to local hospitals.
She was incorrectly diagnosed as suffering from heat exposure, and she died at eight oclock that evening.
X-rays later revealed a severe cerebral hemorrhage as the cause of her death.
Nico was buried in her mothers plot in Grunewald Forest Cemetery in Berlin.
A few friends played a tape of Mutterlein, a song from Desertshore, at her funeral.
Shannon Hoon of Blind Melon named his daughter Nico Blue partly after Nico.
Blind Melons album Nico was released after Hoons death.
The song is written by Stephen Trask.
Icelandic singer Bjork opened concerts on her 1995-1997 Post tour with Le Petit Chevalier from Desertshore.
The Cult recorded the song Nico, which celebrates the life of the singer, on their 2001 album Beyond Good And Evil.
For her 2002 album, Kissin Time, Marianne Faithfull recorded Song for Nico, cowritten with Dave Stewart.
Los Angeles band The Warlocks recorded a different song, also entitled Song for Nico on their 2003 album, Rise and Fall.
Nico was portrayed by Christina Fulton in the 1991 biopic The Doors.
Soap & Skin ; portrayed Nico in the theatre play Nico - Sphinx aus Eis in 2008, written by Werner Fritsch.
In the play, Nico was portrayed by several actresses.
Soap & Skin ; also recorded her song Janitor of Lunacy.
Natasha Khan has quoted Nico as an influence in particular Desertshore.
During 2007 she would start concerts with Le Petit Chevalier from that record.
Singer-songwriter Patrick Wolf has been influenced by Nico, and released cover versions of Afraid and Aris Song as b-sides on EPs.
The song also makes reference to her death, and her drug use.
Austin based band Shearwater dedicated their album Palo Santo to the memory of Nico.
The opening song depicts Nicos death at Ibiza, Spain.
A live version of the song can be found on a limited edition 7-inch.
Marc Almond recorded his song Your Kisses Burn from his The Stars We Are album together with Nico in 1988.
It was to be Nicos last studio recording.
Low, an American indie rock group from Duluth, Minnesota, has a song titled Those Girls.
It is included on the box set, released in 2004.
Nicos son, Ari Boulogne, made a brief appearance on stage at the close.
The Scooby-Doo !.
Mystery Incorporated episode Art of Darkness featured a parody of Nico named Eeko.
In 2012, X-TG released a re-interpretation of Nicos Desertshore album.
In Autumn of 2012, Rooster Gallery in New York City presented an exhibit called Nico : New York, New York.
This featured photographs by Jerry Schatzberg.
Bahauddin Mohiuddin Dagar is the rudra veena player and son of famous north Indian musician Zia Mohiuddin Dagar.
He plays rudra veena with the dagarbani style.
He represents the 20th generation of Dagar lineage, referring to Nayak Haridas Dagar of the 16th century.
He began his training on the sitar under the tutelage of his mother Smt Pramila Dagar at the age of seven.
Since then he has been responsible for keeping the Saadharani Geeti style of Dhrupad alive on the Rudra Veena.
He firmly believes that teaching is integral to his own learning and growth as a musician.
In 1990 Baha'ud - din received the Lakhanpal Foundation fellowship for two years.
He also received a two year Fellowship in 1993 from the Ministry of Human Resource Development, India.
His music has been recorded by Music TodayMakars, -LSB- France ; Ragini Sutra Sense World -LSB- London and India Music archives.
Early life and training.
Dagar started learning the veena from his father when he was 12 years old.
After the demise of Zia Dagar in 1990, he continued his training under his uncle Zia Fariddudin Dagar.
The Punjab Gharana is one of the six Tabla Gharanas.
Initially a pakhawaj-playing gharana, the Punjab school was created in the nineteenth century.
The distinctive features of Punjab Gharana are :.
There is debate as to who precisely set up the Gharana.
Some believe it was Lala Bhavanidas.
And others claim that the founder was Lala Bhavanidass follower, Mian Qadir Baksh I.
Yet others are of the view that it was Saddu Hussain Baksh, follower of Qadir Baksh I who founded it.
Around the turn of the 20th century, Fakir Baksh, disciple of Saddu Hussain Baksh was the foremost advocate.
He was essentially a Pakhawaj player but certainly the first to introduce Tabla in this Gharana.
His disciples were his son Qadir Baksh II besides many like Baba Malang, and Feroze Khan of Lahore.
Jnan Prakash Ghosh of Farukhabad gharana also studied with Feroze Khan.
Ustad Alla Rakhas brilliant son, Ustad Zakir Hussain grew into a world renowned iconic figure of Tabla.
Qadir Baksh II.
Teacher : Mia Faqir Baksh from Sialkot Pakistan.
A legendary name, Mia Qadir Bakhsh was the authoritative head or Khalifa of the Punjab Gharana.
Teacher of internationally renowned maestro Ustad Allah Rakha and several others like Ustad Allah Ditta and Mia Shaukat Hussain.
An adept Pakhawaj player, Mia Qadir Baksh was noted for his layakari and reputation as a dedicated teacher.
Towards the end of his life he became a highly eccentric faqir.
After his death the khalifa-ship of the Punjab gharana passed to his nephew Khalifa Akhtar Hussain.
Akhtar Hussain Khan.
Teachers : Mian Qadir Bukhsh, Ustad Mashooqay Khan and Ustad Aslam Khan.
Teacher : Mian Qadir Baksh II.
Allarakha Khan was one of the most famous and widely recorded tabla players of the twentieth century.For tabla,.
Ustad Allarakha was such an artist, having brought his instrument a stature and respect never before enjoyed.
Rakha popularized the art of tabla, playing across the globe, elevating the status and respect of his instrument.
Rakha also collaborated with Jazz master Buddy Rich, recording an album together in 1968.
His consistently brilliant performances made the tabla a familiar percussion instrument the world over.
Shaukat Hussain Khan.
Teachers : Pandit Hiralal & Mian Qadir Bukhsh.
Ustad Shaukat Hussain Khan ranked amongst the finest musicians of South Asia.
Apart from his prowess over the solo repertoire, the maestro 's forte was his impeccable accompaniment.
Shaukat Hussain Khan was the accompanist of choice for Pakistans great vocalists and instrumentalists, and he always offered impeccable support.
As a soloist one hears the Delhi roots of his sound mixed with a truly Panjabi sense of rhythmic complexity.
One can hear this complexity in the varied internal phrase lengths of pieces and in the taal structures.
Altaf Hussain Tafo Khan.
Teachers : Mian Qadir Bukhsh & Haji Fida Hussain.
The renowned Tafo Khan is recognised for his matchless tayyari.
His solo performances are characterised by his dazzling prowess over difficult bols and charismatic stage presence.
Abdul Sattar Tari Khan.
Teacher : Shaukat Hussain Khan.
Tari always provided an exquisite accompaniment : clean, crisp thekas with astonishingly quick and interesting laggis to punctuate the verses.
Since then, Tari has gone on to international fame as a tabla showman.
His International Kherwa was a popular item.
Teacher/Father : Ustad.
Zakir Hussain is easily the most famous and influential tabla player of the modern age.
It is difficult to think of anyone else in the world who has made an instrument -LSB- tabla . -RSB-.
Hussain was a child prodigy, and was touring by the age of twelve.
Ustad Zakir Hussain.
Teacher : Utd.
For the last 16 years he has been associated with Mynta, his world music band based in Sweden.
They have performed all over the world and have released six immensely popular albums.
Teacher : Utd.
A disciple of the great Allarakha Khan, Yogesh has made a reputation for himself as an intelligent and supportive accompanist.
Teacher : Utd.
Alla Rakha, Utd.
Shaukat Hussain Khan, Utd.
Fayyaz Khan & Pandit Sharda Sahai.
His solo performances have gained great recognition all over the world.
Shahbaz is also a dedicated teacher of the Tabla.
He delivers regular teaching to young people and adults in and around the UK as well as worldwide.
Teacher : Utd.
Dildar Hussain was the percussionist of Ustad Nusrat Fateh Ali Khans Qawwali party until Nusrats death in 1997.
Dildar Hussain learned tabla from Ustad Allah Rakha Khan.
His first performance was in India in 1969 before he joined Ustad Nusrat Fateh Ali Khans Qawwali party in 1971.
Along with Farrukh Fateh Ali Khan, Nusrats brother, Dildar had been a member of the party since its formation.
With incredible skill as a tabla master, Ustad Dildar now carries the tradition on with his sons.
His eldest leading the party Abrar and his youngest Israr sitting in the seat, like his father as tabla player.
Now Dildar is a amazing composer, singer and harmonium player.
Dildar teaches and performs internationally with his students Yasar Hussain in Denmark and Aminah Chishti in the US.
This unique style is known to be over 1000 year old created by the great Amir Khusro.
Rare to see even in pakistan.
Created with the intention to carry sound acoustically.
Ustad has also toured and can sometimes be seen accompanying Rahat Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan.
Pandit Rama Kant.
TEACHER-Ustad Bahadur Singh.
Pandit Rama kant is a renowned tabla maestro of Punjab gharana.
He started his training from his father Pandit Kunj Lal from Nurmahal, Jalandhar districtat age five.
He started giving musical performances at a very early age.
His father, who was also a vocalist and instrumentalist, trained all his sons and daughters with great punctuality.
Every day, they had to do riyaaz in morning, noon and night.
Seeing his great devotion towards music, Ustad Bahadur Singh accepted panditji as his disciple.
He has given various solo as well as accompanist.
Presently he is involved in many institutions of Punjab which give the knowledge of Indian classical music.
He has trained many students in Namdhari Kala Kendra, Jawwadi Taksal In Jawwadi Kalan, Gurudwara Badu Sahib.
Many school and college students take him as their idol in the field of music.
TEACHER - Utd.
Alla Rakha Born as grandson to great legendary vocalist Padmabhushan Hirabai Barodekar, he is amongst the renowned artists today.
With a great sense of melody, rhythm & eloquence, he puts forth a unique style of solo presentations.
U Srinivasan & many more.
He has been awarded Layashiromani by Ganayogi Panchakshara Sangeet Samiti Chennai, Taal Mani etc.
He is a versatile guru & few of his students are established Tabla players.
Ustad Bahadur Singh.
TEACHER-Ustad Meeran Baksh.
He had accompanied many musicians and played at for the All India Radio.
Professor Ranjit Singh.
TEACHER-Ustad Bahadur Singh.
Professor Ranjit Singh is one of Ustad Bahadur Singhs senior most students.
Ranjit Singh was based in Ludhiana but is now currently in California.
His interest for tabla and music began as a child as he began to study the history of Sikhism.
Ranjit Singh has studied vocal under the great Ustad Sohan Singh and Ustad Giani Gian Singh Almast.
Ranjit Singh also taught tabla as well as sitar at India Government College in Ludhiana.
He then moved to California and has his own academy.
He is also well versed in the Jori-Pakhawaj style of playing which is also a part of the Punjab Gharana.
Professor Parshotam Singh.
TEACHER-Ustad Bahadur Singh.
Professor Parshotam Singh has been widely regarded as one of Ustad Bahadur Singhs most gifted students.
Furthermore, Parshotam Singh continued his education in other Indian Classical instruments : Sitar, Dilruba, Harmonium to name a few.
Parshotam Singh is also known to have learnt vocal training alongside Ghazal King Jagjit Singh in their earlier years.
Currently Parshotam Singh resides in Canada and continues to train and pass on the wealth of knowledge to his students.
A rasika is a term for an aesthete of Hindustani classical music.
The term is derived from Sanskrit meaning full of Passion, elegant ; with discrimination.
Connoisseur - An expert able to appreciate a field ; especially in the fine arts.
In the context of carnatic music.
In carnatic music concerts, the audience is usually called rasikas.
Pandit Jasraj Institute for Music, Research, Artistry and Appreciation.
The institute is based in New Hyde Park and has branches in Manhattan, Edison and Pittsburgh.
The institute organizes an annual workshop titled Shibir, publishes the JasRangi Magazine and organizes artistes concerts.
A that is a mode in northern Indian or Hindustani music.
The modern that system was created by Vishnu Narayan Bhatkhande in the early decades of the twentieth century.
Bhatkhande modeled his system after the Carnatic melakarta classification, devised around 1640 A.D. by the musicologist Venkatamakhin.
Bhatkhande visited many of the gharanas of North Indian classical music, conducting a detailed analysis of Indian raga.
His research led him to a system of ten thats, each named after a prominent raga associated with it.
Many correspond to one or other of the European church modes.
One can arbitrarily designate any pitch as Sa and build the series from there.
While all thats contain seven notes, many ragas contain fewer than seven and some use more.
Ambiguities inevitably arise.
Raga Jaijaivanti contains both shuddha nishad and komal nishad, which by definition corresponds to no that.
Bhatkande resolved such cases by an ad hoc consideration, appealing to musical performance practice.
Each that contains a different combination of altered and natural notes.
The flattening or sharpening of pitches always occurs with reference to the interval pattern in Bilawal that.
In effect only heptatonic diatonic scales are called that.
Bhatkhande applied the term that only to scales that fulfill the following rules :.
That and time of performance.
Ragas are normally ascribed to certain periods of the day and night.
Traditionally, disastrous consequences are to be expected.
Bhatkhande stated that the correct time to play a raga had a relation to its that.
Anant Manohar Joshi.
Pandit Anant Manohar Joshi, also known as Antubuwa Joshi, was an Indian vocalist of Khayal - genre of Hindustani classical music.
Pandit Antubuwa Joshi was born at Kinhai, near Aundh, in Satara district of Maharashtra, India.
He studied under Gwalior gharana with Balakrishnabuwa Ichalkaranjikar.
His disciples include his son, Gajananrao Joshi.
Allah Rakha, also referred to by the title Ustad, was a Pakistani sarangi player.
Early life and education.
Allah Rakha was born in Muzaffar, a village in Sialkot District of Punjab, in 1932.
During early childhood, his family moved to Amritsar, where he was raised.
He acquired his initial education in classical music and sarangi playing from his father, Ustad Lal Din.
Later, he became the student of three renowned sarangi players, Ustad Ahmadi Khan, Ustad Allah Diya, and Ustad Nathu Khan.
It was also here that he met Ustad Bade Ghulam Ali Khan and honed his skills as a sarangi accompanist.
In 1994, he was awarded the Pride of Performance for his lifelong devotion to classical music.
Zeelaf is a raga in Hindustani classical music.
It is a pentatonic melody is composed of the following swaras : S G M P d.
It is performed very rarely.
Amir Khusru, the father of modern Hindustani music, is said to have created about twelve new melodies, among which is Zeelaf.
Passages is collaborative chamber music studio album co-composed by Ravi Shankar and Philip Glass, released in 1990 through Atlantic Records.
The albums content is a hybrid of Hindustani classical music and Glass distinct American minimal contemporary classical style.
The album reached a peak position of number three on Billboard Top World Music Albums chart.
Offering, the albums opening track, begins with a slow introduction before the saxophone establishes the Shankar raga melody.
Two additional saxophones join, followed by an extended middle section at a faster tempo, all before returning to the starting theme.
Allmusic s Jim Brenholts awarded the album four of five stars, calling the music brilliant.
Track listing adapted from Allmusic.
Credits adapted from Allmusic.
In the United States, Passages reached a peak position of number three on Billboard Top World Music Albums chart.
Kartik Seshadri is a leading sitarist, composer and teacher.
He was noted as a child prodigy in India.
He began studying under Ravi Shankar in 1974.
Early life and background.
As a sitarist, Kartik Seshadri attracted widespread attention when he began performing full-length solos at the age of 6 in India.
The prestigious British magazine Songlines declared Seshadri  stands out amongst sitarists for his clarity and intricate rhythmic sensibility.
Seshadri performs extensively as a soloist in major venues throughout India and abroad.
Seshadri 's performances are noted for their expressive beauty, rich tonal sensibility and extraordinary rhythmic intricacy.
Seshadri is also a distinguished composer and educator of Indian music.
His composition Quartet for a Raga received its world premiere in Washington, DC under the auspices of the Contemporary Music Forum.
Saptak means gamut or the series of seven notes.
In Sanskrit, saptak literally means containing seven and is derived from the Sanskrit word sapta which means seven.
The basic saptak is called the Madhya Saptak.
For notes with lower frequencies, the artist may use the Mandra Saptak, which is a lower octave than the Madhya Saptak.
For notes with higher frequencies, the upper octave or the Taar Saptak is used.
The usual scale of Indian music spans from Sa in the Madhya Saptak to Sa in the higher, Taar Saptak.
This makes eight notes instead of the seven in each Saptak.
Generally, a raga involves notes from three saptaks.
Sudhir Nayak is an Indian classical harmonium player.
Sudhir Nayak was born to Kota Sarvottam Nayak and Suvarny Nayak in Mumbai.
His parents hailing from the South Canara district of Costal Karnataka, later moved to Mumbai.
Sudhir Nayak holds a Bachelor 's degree in Commerce from Pune university studying at MESs Garware College of Commerce, Pune.
Sudhir also benefitted from the guidance he received from Shri.
Jayant Keshav Watve and Shri.
Bhaurao Mahadev Pawar, for a brief period, while in Pune.
Jitendra Abhisheki, Pt.
Firoz Dastur, Pt.
Ram Ashreya Jha, Pt.Yastwantbuva Joshi, Pt.
Babanrao Haldankar, Pt.
Gangubai Hangal, Smt.
Padmavati Shaligram, Dr. Prabha Atre, Smt.
Shobha Gurtu, Pt.
Birju Maharaj, to name a few.
He is also regularly associated with contemporary musicians like Smt.
Shubha Mudgal, Pt.Rajan & Sajan Misra, Pt.
Ajoy Chakravarty, Ustad Rashid Khan, Pt.
Ulhas Kashalkar, Dr. Aneesh Pradhan, Shounak Abhisheki, Ashwini Bhide-Deshpande, Devaki Pandit, Arati Tikekar among many others.
Sudhir 's musical performances are regularly featured on Indian television and commercial recordings.
Sudhir also participates in cross-cultural collaborations being a part of the ensemble ` Koshish '.
Sudhir has also composed music for many projects and albums which have been recorded and published commercially.
He also conducts workshops related to the Harmonium at different places in India and abroad.
He has been invited as a visiting lecturer through the Department of Fine Arts and Music, University of Pittsburgh, USA.
Awards and recognitions.
Sudhir Nayak is married to Bharati Nayak and they have a daughter, Maitreyi.
Taan is a virtuoso technique used in the vocal performance of a raga in Hindustani classical music.
It is similar to the technique ahaat, used in Arabic music.
The murki, a type of ornamentation, is a swift and taan-like movement that is heavily used in thumri.
Taans are clustered in different types :.
Bol Taan : Taan can be sung by utilizing the words of the bandish.
Shuddha/Sapat Taan : The notes are placed in an order in one or more octaves.
Koot Taan : The notes do not remain in order.
Therefore the nature of Koot Taans is complicated.
Mishra Taan : Combination of sapat and koot taans.
Ali Ahmed Hussain Khan.
Ali Ahmed Hussain Khan is a shehnai specialist from India.
He was born in Kolkata on March 21, 1939.
His grandfather Wazir Ali Khan was the first to demonstrate Indian classical music on shehnai at Buckingham Palace.
He has taught shehnai at Sangeet Research Academy, Calcutta since 1974.
He is regularly featured on All India Radio and Indian Television.
He holds the distinction of composing the signature tune for Indian Television with Pandit Ravi Shankar.
His recordings are numerous and under variety of labels.
Ali Ahmed has extensively traveled in India and abroad.
On several occasions he has been invited/sponsored by governments and/or music festivals.
He performed a duet with pianist Peter Michael Hamel at the Indo-German Festival.
He participated in Music Festival Raag-Mala in the U.S. and Canada in 1994.
Budhaditya Mukherjee is a Hindustani classical sitar and surbahar player of the Imdadkhani Gharana.
In 1975, Budhaditya became a grade A artist with All India Radio.
Since then, he has become an established sitarist, known for virtuosity, speed and precision.
He has also recorded widely, and at the age of 47, his discography spanned exactly 47 CDs, LPs and cassettes.
His son, Bijoyaditya, was born in 1984, and started training with Bimalendu and Budhaditya at the age of 5.
Budhaditya Mukherjee holds a doctorate in metallurgical engineering.
Pandit Jagdish Prasad was a Calcutta - based Hindustani classical vocalist of the Patiala Gharana.
He was awarded by the principality of Raigadh at the age of 5.
Later he became a student of Bade Ghulam Ali Khan.
Under the tutelage of both, he enriched his repertoire in both classical and semi-classical music.
He had tremendous control over both melody as well as rhythm.
He is a Top grade radio artist.
His legacy is being carried on by his sons.
Dawning Dewdrops : Ragas : Gurjari Todi, Bhatiyar & Kafi Thumri.
Shraddhanjali : Ragas : Bageshri, Gujri Todi, Bhairavi Thumri, Vacahspati, Desh Thumri, Pahadi Thumri.
Ustad Rashid Khan is an Indian classical musician in the Hindustani music tradition.
He belongs to the Rampur-Sahaswan gharana, and is the great-grandson of gharana founder Inayat Hussain Khan.
He is married to Soma Khan.
He was awarded the Padma Shri, as well as the Sangeet Natak Akademi Award in 2006 and Padma Bhushan in 2013.
Born in Badayun, Uttar Pradesh.
He received his initial training from his maternal grand-uncle, Ustad Nissar Hussain Khan.
He is also the nephew of Ustad Ghulam Mustafa Khan.
As a child he had little interest in music.
However, he received his main training from Nissar Hussain Khan, initially at his house in Badayun.
A whole day would be spent on practising just a single note.
It was not until he was 18 that Rashid began to truly enjoy his musical training.
By 1994, he was acknowledged as a musician at the academy.
The Rampur-Sahaswan gayaki is closely related to the Gwalior gharana, which features medium-slow tempos, a full-throated voice and intricate rhythmic play.
He is influenced with the style of Ustad Amir Khan and Pandit Bhimsen Joshi.
There is no imitation of instrumental tone.
His renderings stand out for the emotional overtones in his melodic elaboration.
He has also performed jugalbandis, along with sitarist Shahid Parvez and others.
Sangeetha Katti popularly known as Sangeetha Katti is a Hindustani classical vocalist in India.
She was recently awarded the prestigious Suvarna Karnataka Rajyotsava award, 2006-07 by the Karnataka State Government.
Sangeeta Katti was born in Dharwad, Karnataka.
She is a daughter of Dr. H.
Sangeeta Katti is a distinct student in Chemistry Graduation and well versed in several languages like Kannada, Hindi, English, Marathi etc.
Sangeeta Katti has bagged several meritorious awards for her melodious compositions and albums.
Leading recording companies like Master Rec.
Co., Chennai, HMV, Lahari Rec.
Co and Sangeet Sagar etc.have released a good number of Audio Cassettes and CDs of Sangeeta.
Sangeeta Katti is residing in Bangalore, India with her husband Sri.
Manmohan Kulkarni and her two kids Chi.
Savani Kulkarni and Chi.
Ninad Kulkarni, musing on music.
Trained initially under Sri Sheshagiri Dandapur and Pt.
Chanderashekhar Puranikmath, Sangeeta received advanced training in classical vocals from Padmabhushan Pt.
Basavaraj Rajguru of Kirana & Gwalior Gharana for about 12 years.
She is presently under the tutelage of Padmavibushana Gana Sarswati Smt Kishori Amonkar of the Jaipur-Atrauli Gharana.
Sangeetha to date has over 2500 concerts to her credit, her very first performance being at the age of 4.
She has also performed in the United States, UK, and Canada.
She is a regular feature in most of the important music festivals in India.
She was a teaching faculty in Hindustani Vocal music at Bharathiya Vidya Bhavan, Bengaluru.
List of concerts.
Concerts in abroad.
Other Associations like :.
Awards & recognitions.
Sangeetha has won numerous awards.
The list follows.
Three Ragas is an 1956 LP album by Hindustani classical musician Ravi Shankar.
It was digitally remastered and released in CD format by Angel Records in 2000.
Sheema Mukherjee is a British composer and sitar player.
She is best known for her work with musical collective Transglobal Underground and The Imagined Village.
She is the niece of sitarist Nikhil Banerjee.
In 2005, Billboard referred to her as a sitar prodigy.
Mukherjee studied Hindustani classical music under her uncle Nikhil Banerjee, Ali Akbar Khan and later Aashish Khan.
In 1998 she joined Transglobal Underground.
In 2005, she composed the music for the West Yorkshire Playhouse productions Gluey and the Lion and Non-Contact Time.
She also composed the score for the Tamasha Theatre Company s 2009 musical Wuthering Heights.
Her composition Bending in the Dark was featured during the 2012 Summer Olympics.
Nodu Mallik was a sitar maker from India.
Pandit Ravi Shankar was known for using his sitars.
Bhairav, or Bhairon, is a raga in Hindustani classical music that was for centuries considered to be the most important raga.
Its modern form with an important komal rishabh is, however, very different from that described in the old texts.
There are several allied ragas such as Ahir Bhairav, Bairagi, Gunkali, Hijaz Bhairav, Nat Bhairav, Ramkali, Jogiya and Kalingda.
This raga corresponds to Mayamalavagowla in Carnatic music.
Bhairon appears in the Sikh tradition from northern India and is part of the Guru Granth Sahib.
The composition in this raga appear on a total of 43 pages from page numbers 1125 to 1168.
Bhairav was an important raga at the time of Guru Nanak and has continued to retain its significance and popularity.
Bhairav appears in the Ragmala as husband/wife of Bhairavi and four other raginis.
Today it is the head raga for one of the ten thatas.
Mesakarna calls this morning melody of the autumn season one of awesome grandeur.
In descent the vibrato must begin with upper limit.
Otherwise Bhairav has few characteristic phrases.
Ektara is a one-string instrument most often used in traditional music from Bangladesh, India, Egypt, and Pakistan.
Pressing the two halves of the neck together loosens the string, thus lowering its pitch.
The modulation of the tone with each slight flexing of the neck gives the ektara its distinctive sound.
There are no markings or measurements to indicate what pressure will produce what note, so the pressure is adjusted by ear.
The various sizes of ektara are soprano, tenor, and bass.
The bass ektara, sometimes called a dotara often has two strings.
Yet another version is khamak, one-headed drum with a string attached to it which is plucked.
Use in kirtan.
Used by Sadhus, or wandering holy men.
Also, the ektara is used for Sufi chanting as well as by the Bauls of Bengal.
The playing style of this instrument is a simultaneous pluck and gong, matching the rhythm of the music.
The Ektara and the Ghati Baya, together form a complete set accompaniments, especially to Devotional and Deolati musical traditions.
The string, as in a Dotara, is tuned to the main/root note of the composition.
In Sindhi and Punjabi folk music.
Nowadays the ektara is widely used by folk singers especially by Sufi singers in Punjab and Sindh.
Traditional and modern forms of bhangra sometimes use an ektara or tumbi to accompany the singer and dhol.
Mention may also be made here of the Dotar of Khorasan.
Nur-Mohammad Dorpur is a famous traditional Dotar player from the Khorasan region.
An electric sitar is a kind of electric guitar designed to mimic the sound of the traditional Indian instrument, the sitar.
Depending on the manufacturer and model, these instruments bear varying degrees of resemblance to the traditional sitar.
The instrument was developed in the late 1960s at Danelectro, when many western musical groups began to use the sitar.
The sitar is generally considered a difficult instrument to learn.
The twangy sitar like tone comes from a flat bridge adding the necessary buzz to the guitar strings.
These strings have their own pickups, and are usually tuned with a harp wrench.
A unique type of bridge, a buzz bridge, helps give the instrument its distinctive sound.
Some electric sitars have drone strings in lieu of sympathetic strings.
The sympathetic strings on most electric sitars do not resonate strongly enough to match the effect of an acoustic sitar.
Versions of the electric sitar were also developed mainly in India.
These are smaller sized sitars that look like a sitar.
These sitars are tuned the same way as the original classical sitar would be tuned.
Raagnagrok is a contemporary duo using electric sitar and electronic.
The instrument provided accompaniment on such songs as Snowbird, Rose Garden, Are You from Dixie ?.
Blues musician Buddy Guy played, among other guitars, a Coral electric sitar in shows on his 2010 tour.
Ajrara gharana or Ajrada gharana is one of the six main traditional schools in tabla drum.
The Ajrada Gharana is traced to Kallu and Miru in the beginning of the 19th century.
Genealogy, They were disciples of Sitab Khan.
This Gharana is an offshoot of the Delhi Gharana.
The distinctiveness of this Gharana is the use of complex Bols and Meend.
Pakhawaj bols are rare.
The stress is on Ad and Barabar laya.
It specializes in the three-time pattern.
The position of the left drum is not changed, but its face is touched with the thumb.
Gheginak, gheghe, Dhadagena, Nadagena or Tadagena etc. are used in Qayadas.
Habibuddin Khan, Niazu Khan and Ramzan Khan, Manju Khan, Hasmat Ali Khan, Akram Khan http://akramkhantabla.in.
Clarity of sound is made possible by the propensity for using the index and middle fingers in the traditional manner.
Bols like Dhina gi na, Ghe Ghe Tit Kit, Dha Ge Na etc are most frequently used.
These bols create a certain resonance.
Pakhawaj bols are rarely encountered in this gharana.
Ajrada is most well known for its theme and various compositions as well as its beautiful and balanced Bayan work.
Following is the typical Ajrada Kayada.
Based on Teen Tall or tritaal.
Dhag Dhinagina DhaTtirkitatakTirkit DhagDhina DhatitDhagTinagina.
1 -------------------- 2 -------------------- 3 -------------------- 4.
Tag Tinagina TTtirkitatakTirkit DhagDhina DhatitDhagDhinagina.
Dhag Dhinagina DhaTtirkitatakTirkit DhagDhina DhatitDhagTinagina.
9 10 11 12.
Tag Tinagina TTtirkitatakTirkit DhagDhina DhatitDhagDhinagina.
13 14 15 16.
Though, on the world stage Ajrada is weakly represented, the gharanas compositions are played by almost everyone.
The most notable representative of this Gharana has been Ustad Habibuddin Khan.
Manju Khan Sahib, son and student of Ustad Habibuddin Khan Sahib, is a great representative of Ajrada Gharana.
So also Ustad Niazu Khan and Pt Sudhirkumar Saxena, a student of Habibuddin Khan were noted teachers.
Another living exponent is Ustad Hashmat Ali Khan.
Ustad Ghulam Sarvar Sabri and Ustad Akram Khan are among the finest young representatives today.
Shri krishan sharma.
Shrikrishan Sharma is one the leading musician of the country.
Hails from a family of musicians.
He has also performed in America, Mauritius, Reunion and the Netherlands.
Prominent in his guitar recital is Gayaki Ang, with imaginative Alap, Jod Jhala, Gatkari and Layakari, in which he excels.
He has also featured in programmes broadcast by All India Radio and on television over three decades.
Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan.
Extending the 600-year old Qawwali tradition of his family, Khan is widely credited with introducing Qawwali music to international audiences.
He is popularly known as Shahenshah - e-Qawwali, meaning The King of Kings of Qawwali.
Born in Faisalabad, Pakistan, Khan had his first public performance at age of 16, at his fathers chelum.
He became the head of the family qawwali party in 1971.
He was signed by Oriental Star Agencies, Birmingham, England, in the early 1980s.
Khan went on to release movie scores and albums in Europe, India, Japan, Pakistan, and the U.S.A.
He engaged in collaborations and experiments with Western artists, becoming a well-known world music artist.
He toured extensively, performing in over 40 countries.
Early life and career.
He was the fifth child and first son of Fateh Ali Khan, a musicologist, vocalist, instrumentalist, and Qawwal.
Khans family, which included four older sisters and a younger brother, Farrukh Fateh Ali Khan, grew up in central Faisalabad.
Initially, his father did not want Khan to follow the familys vocation.
However, Khan showed such an aptitude for, and interest in, Qawwali that his father finally relented.
Khan began by learning to play tabla alongside his father before progressing to learn Raag Vidya and Bol Bandish.
He then went on to learn to sing within the classical framework of khayal.
Khan sang mainly in Urdu and Punjabi and occasionally in Persian, Braj Bhasha and Hindi.
The song featured restrained use of Khans sargam improvisations.
In 1979, Khan married his first cousin, Naheed ; they had one daughter, Nida.
Early in his career, Khan was signed up by Oriental Star Agencies in the U.K. to their Star Cassette Label.
In the summer of 1985, Khan performed at the World of Music, Arts and Dance festival in London.
He performed in Paris in 1985 and 1988.
He first visited Japan in 1987, at the invitation of the Japan Foundation.
He also performed at the 5th Asian Traditional Performing Art Festival in Japan.
He also performed at Brooklyn Academy of Music, New York in 1989, earning him admiration from the American audience.
One of these songs was re-used on the soundtrack for Eat Pray Love in 2010.
Khan also contributed to the soundtrack of Natural Born Killers.
He composed the music for the 1994 film Bandit Queen in collaboration with Roger White.
Alanis Morissette was brought in to sing with his unfinished vocals.
Khan also collaborated with Michael Brook to create music for the song Sweet Pain used in the movie Any Given Sunday.
His album Intoxicated Spirit was nominated for a Grammy award in 1997 for best traditional folk album.
Khan contributed songs to, and performed in, several Pakistani films.
He sang a song for the film Dhadkan.
He also sang Saya bhi saath jab chhod jaye for Sunny Deols movie Dillagi.
The song was released in 1999, two years after Khans death.
Rahman, who was a big fan of Khan could not do further songs with him.
As a tribute, Rahman later released an album titled Gurus of Peace, which featured Allah Hoo by Khan.
Rahmans 2007 song Tere Bina was also done as a tribute to Khan.
He died of a sudden cardiac arrest at Cromwell Hospital, London, on Saturday, 16 August 1997, aged 48.
His body was repatriated to Faisalabad, Pakistan, and his funeral was a public affair.
His wife, Naheed Nusrat passed away on 13 September 2013 in Toronto, Canada.
Composition of Nusrats qawwali party.
The composition of Khans ensemble, called a party, changed over its 26 years history.
Listed below is a snapshot of the party, circa 1983 :.
The one significant member of the party who does not appear on this list is Atta Fareed.
For many years, he alternated with Rehmat Ali on vocals and second harmonium.
He is easily identifiable in videos since he plays the harmonium left-handed.
Awards and titles.
Khan is widely considered to be the most important qawwal in history.
In 1987, Khan received the President of Pakistan 's Award for Pride of Performance for his contribution to Pakistani music.
In 1995 he received the UNESCO Music Prize.
In the same year, Khan received the Arts and Culture Prize of the Fukuoka Asian Culture Prizes.
In 2005, Khan received the Legends award at the UK Asian Music Awards.
He also appeared on NPR s 50 Great Voices list in 2010.
In August 2010 he was included in CNN s list of the twenty most iconic musicians from the past fifty years.
Many honorary titles were bestowed upon Khan during his 25-year music career.
He was given the title of Ustad after performing classical music at a function in Lahore on his fathers death anniversary.
Tributes, legacy and influence.
Alexandra A. Seno of Asiaweek wrote :.
Nusrat Fateh Ali Khans voice was otherworldly.
For 25 years, his mystical songs transfixed millions.
His vocal range, talent for improvisation and sheer intensity were unsurpassed.
In 2008, Khan was listed in 14th position in UGO s list of the best singers of all time.
The album, Dub Qawwali, was released by Six Degrees Records.
It also earned Gaudi a nomination for the BBCs World Music Awards 2008.
Ustad Faiyaz Khan was an Indian classical vocalist, an exponent of the Agra Gharana.
Born at Sikandara near Agra in 1886, he was the son of Shabr Hussain, who died three months before his birth.
He was brought up by his maternal grandfather, Ghulam Abbas, who taught him music up to the age of 25.
He was also a student of Ustad Mehboob Khan Daraspiya, his father-in-law.
The Maharaja of Mysore awarded him the title Aftab-e-Mousiqui.
Faiyaz Khans specialities were dhrupad and khyal, but he was also capable of singing thumri and ghazal.
It is known that he had held a musical session at Jorasanko a few years before the passing away of Tagore.
Faiyaz Khan himself was an admirer of Abdul Karim Khan.
S.N.Ratanjankar was perhaps the last of his pupils who excelled both as a teacher and as a performer.
The available recordings of the Ustad are almost entirely from his later years.
78 rpm side A Lalat Aalaap, side B drut tadapata hoom jaise jale bin meene.
Also Thumri Bhairavi Baaju bande khula khula ja.
Pandit Sanjeev Abhyankar is a Hindustani classical music vocalist of the Mewati Gharana.
Sanjeev Abhyankar was born on October 5, 1969 in Pune, India to Dr. Shobha Abhyankar.
Though his aim had been to pursue a career in music since childhood, he has acquired a Bachelors Degree in Commerce.
Sanjeev Abhyankar rendered his first stage performance in Mumbai, at the age of 11 in 1981.
Since then, he has traveled extensively all over the country and abroad.
He has also given playback for films such as Maachis, Nidaan, Sanshodhan, Dil Pe Mat Le Yaar and Banaras.
He has contributed to the already existing vast repertoire of Mewati compositions.
He specializes in jugalbandi and has performed jugalbandis with Durga Jasraj, Kala Ramnath and Ashwini Bhide Deshpande.
Awards and recognition.
Ajit Kadkade is a reputed Hindu devotional singer in Maharashtra, India.
He learnt Hindustani classical music from the famous singer Jitendra Abhisheki.
Ajit specializes in singing Marathi devotional songs, Abhangs, Natya Sangeet, Hindustani classical music etc.
He is known for his unique and melodious style of singing.
The vichitra veena is a plucked string instrument used in Hindustani music.
It is similar to the Carnatic gottuvadhyam.
It has no frets and is played with a slide.
The Vichitra Veena is the modern form of ancient Ektantri Veena.
The narrow ends of the instrument are fashioned into peacock heads, the national bird of India.
Underneath them are 13 sympathetic strings tuned to the notes of the appropriate raag.
The veena has a five-octave range.
Coconut oil is put on the strings to minimize the friction of the sliding hand holding the batta.
He also changed his name from Akaasa to Mir Akaasa.
He was the first to introduce bols into tabla playing.
The first bols introduced in tabla were TAT-DHIT-THUN-NAN.
Mir Akaasa died in the year 1189 AD.
He was succeeded by nine sons and one daughter.
This tradition continued till the 26th descendant, Ustad Haji Vilayat Ali Khan.
It was he who named this ` gharana ' after the province in which he used to live viz.
Ustad Haji Vilayat Ali Khan gave this gharana the name of the province where he used to live, which was Farukkabad.
Ustad Haji Vilayat Khan got the title of Haji after his completion of 7 haj.
This battle continued for almost 15 days where many gats and jodas were exchanged.
On the 15th day Vilayat Khan played a unique Gat whose joda Ustad Salari Khansaheb could not produce.
Thus Vilayat Khan was declared the winner.
Ustad Bakshu Khansaheb as a reward got Vilayat Khan married to his daughter and reputedly gave him 500 tabla compositions.
The lineage of Farukkabad is still carried on by the descendants of This Gharana.
In addition, a large number of gats.
The Farukhabad Gharana is the oldest gharana of Tabla.
The playing style of the Farukhabad gharana contains similarities to its strong, resonant sounds.
There is a greater wealth and emphasis of gats, chalan, and rela compositions than on qaida or peshkar.
There is a prominent use of certain bols, such as dheredhere, takataka.
Ty Burhoe is an American tabla player, record company owner and live concert producer.
Ty Burhoe has been a disciple of the great tabla maestro, Ustad Zakir Hussain, since 1990.
From that time forward, Ty has been dedicated to music, not just as a career but as a life path.
Ty is renowned for his inspired accompaniment and uplifting presence in both the Classical Indian and in fusion settings.
He is internationally recognized as being an innovative influence in creating unique collaborations that weave tabla with many other world traditions.
In 2004 Ty opened his Indie label Tala Records which features many of his unique collaborations.
Ty teaches tabla retreats twice a year in Colorado as well as Musical Universe workshops throughout the world.
He currently resides in Boulder, Colorado USA.
Pandit Vinayak Malharrao Torvi, is an Indian Classical Vocalist.
He belongs to the Gwalior and Kirana Gharana, school of music.
Pandit Vinayak Torvi was born on 4 September 1948 in Ranebennur, in Karnataka.
His father Malharrao Torvi was a Harikatha exponent.
He developed a passion for music, while listening to and accompanying his father during discourses.
He started formal musical education at the age of 9.
Musical education and tutelage.
At the age of 11, when he joined Pt Narayanrao Mujumdar he took music as his passion of life.
In 1964 he joined Gayanacharya Gururao Deshpande, doyen of Gwalior Gharana for advance and performance oriented training.
Torviji is also had a very large influence on the life on his nephew, Raveendra Torvi.
In early 1970s he earned a Bachelor degree in music from Karnataka University Dharwad.
In 1976, he become graded artiste of India Radio.
At around the same time, he earned his Masters in classical music from Karnataka university.
In 1983 he established Gururao Deshpande Sangeet Sabha, in bangalore, which was inaugurated by renowned musician Padmavibhushan Dr. Gangubai Hanagal.
Bhimsen Joshi, gave a memorable concert during the 10th year annual festival of the sabha.
Basavaraj rajguru, Dr. Balamuralikrishna, Pt.
Rajan Sajan Mishra, Pt.
Hariprasad Chaurasia, Dr. Prabha Atre, Pt.
Anindo Chatterjee, Pt.
Ajoy Chakrabarty Pt.
Ulhas Kashalkar, Ustad.
Shahid Parvez performed and supported the sabha.
After Gururao Deshpande died, in 1984, Pt.
Bhimsen Joshi took Torvi under his tutelage.
In 1991-92, Torvi toured England, Scotland and France for concert and lecture cum demonstrations.
This tour was sponsored by Indian Council for Cultural Relations.
Since 1985, Vinayak Torvi, has been performing in major music conferences organised in New Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata, chennai, pune, dharwad, Bangalore.
He has performed in Sawai Gandharva Music Festival, Tansen Festival, ITC SRA Kolkata among others.
He was named artiste of the month, by ITC SRA.
His music has been greatly appreciated by people worldwide.
Torvi is described as Sur Lay Ka Badashah by the legendary musicians Pt.Kishan Maharaj and Pt.Ramashray Jha.
He is well known as Swara Sarvabhauma and Khandani Gayak among music lovers.
So far Pt.
Torvi has more than 20 Classical vocal cds at his credit.
He sings light classical music, devotional music and released cds.
He studied Dhrupad with the Dagar Brothers.
Shrinivas Joshi is an Indian classical vocalist.
He belongs to Kirana Gharana.
Shrinivas Joshi was born to legendary Hindustani vocalist, Bhimsen Joshi and Vastalabai Joshi.
He did his B.Tech from IIT Delhi, but decided to devote his time to music.
Shrinivas Joshi started performing when he was 25 and gave his first solo when he was 30.
He regularly performs at Sawai Gandharva Bhimsen Festival.
Annapurna Devi, born Roshanara Khan  on 23 April 1927, is an Indian surbahar player of Hindustani Classical Music.
After her divorce, she never performed in public, moved to Mumbai, became a recluse and started teaching.
Over the years she has had notable disciples : Hariprasad Chaurasia, Nikhil Banerjee, Amit Bhattacharya and Suresh Vyas.
Early life and family.
Her uncles, Fakir Aftabuddin Khan and Ayet Ali Khan, were noted musicians at their native place Shibpur, in the present-day Bangladesh.
Her former husband, virtuoso Sitar maestro Ravi Shankar, was perhaps the most famous Indian classical musician internationally.
Meanwhile, Alauddin Khan s Sitar student Ravi Shankar married Annapurna.
She converted to Hinduism upon marriage.
Shubhendra Shankar had rigorous training in Sitar under the tutelage of his mother.
His father, however, chose to interrupt his musical talim or training and, instead brought him to the United States.
Shubhendra died at an early age, after a marriage and the birth of three children.
Even the movie Abhimaan is believed to be based on the same scenario.
All of them carry on the legacies of Annapurna Devis, and thus Alauddin Khans, music through their recitals.
She is also the key figure of Acharya Alauddin Music Circle, in Mumbai.
She has received some of the most distinguished musical and civilian honours of India.
She has not recorded any music albums.
Iqbal Hussain Qureshi.
Qureshi was the principle contributor of scientific understanding of various elements : rubidium, potassium, bromide, chlorine, and the Debye model.
Early his career, he made notable contribution in advancing of the field of nuclear medicine in Pakistan.
He spent most of his career as an educator and research scientist at the Pakistan Institute of and Applied Sciences.
Iqbal Hussain Qureshi was born in Ajmer, Rajasthan, British Indian Empire on 27 September 1937.
After the partition of India in 1947, his family moved to Hyderabad, Sindh, where he matriculated from a public high school.
He was a child prodigy, having accepted at the Sindh University in his teenage years to study chemistry.
He received BSc in Chemistry from Sindh University in 1956.
He graduated at the top of his class, wining the Silver Medal with his degree.
He went to United States to attend the University of Michigan where he earned MSc in nuclear chemistry in 1962.
Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission.
However, he was separated from the division when he independently established the radiochemistry division there.
He began working of equation of state on plutonium device as early as 1972.
Notably, he balanced the crucial chemical equation required for the chemical reactions in the fission devices.
By 1977, he famously discovered the technique in order for balancing the Q-value and energy balance in a fission device.
In 1983, he successfully oversaw the PARR-III reactor went into criticality.
He was the recipient of the prestigious Sitara-i-Imtiaz by the Government of Pakistan in 1992.
Academia and government work.
During this time, he authored several articles and published books on nuclear chemistry.
He retained his position till 2001 when he joined the Pakistan Nuclear Regulatory Authority.
At PNRA, he served as the chief scientific officer and adviser to the government on nuclear policy issues.
He served until 2009 when he decided to accept the professorship of chemistry at the Institute of and Applied Sciences.
In 2012, he died with a sudden problem of breathing, and buried in Karachi, Sindh.
As a scientist, he was remembered and noted as a very duty conscientious scientist throughout.
He was a versatile scholar who played classical Sitar on multiple public occasions.
In Indian classical music, Sampurna ragas have all seven swaras in their scale.
In general, the swaras in the Arohana and Avarohana strictly follow the ascending and descending scale as well.
That is, they do not have vakra swara phrases.
An example is Bhairavi raga in Carnatic music.
Some examples of Melakarta ragas are Mayamalavagowla, Todi, Sankarabharanam and Kharaharapriya.
The bass variety, pioneered by Pannalal Ghosh has now been indispensable in Hindustani Classical music for well over half a century.
Bansuris range in size from less than 12 to nearly 40.
The word bansuri originates in the Sanskrit bans + sur -LSB- melody.
There are two varieties of bansuri : transverse, and fipple.
The fipple flute is usually played in folk music and is held at the lips like a whistle.
Because it enables superior control, variations and embellishments, the transverse variety is preferred in Indian classical music.
Pannalal Ghosh elevated the Bansuri from a folk instrument to the stage of serious classical music.
Pandit Raghunath Prasanna was an Indian classical shehnai and flute player.
Bansuri construction is a complex art.
The bamboo suitable for making a bansuri needs to possess several qualities.
It must be thin walled and straight with a uniform circular cross section and long internodes.
Suitable species of bamboo with these traits are endemic to the forests of Assam and Kerala.
After harvesting a suitable specimen, the bamboo is seasoned to allow naturally present resins to strengthen it.
Once ready, a cork stopper is inserted to block one end, next to which the blowing hole is burnt in.
Indian music is played in 3 octaves -- mandra, madhya, and taar -- with ornamentations such as meends and gamaks.
Bansuris range in length from less than 12 inches up to about 40 inches.
20-inch bansuris are common.
The index, middle, and ring fingers of both hands are usually used to finger the six hole bansuri.
For the seven hole bansuri, the little finger of the lower hand is usually employed.
As with other air-reed wind instruments, the sound of a bansuri is generated from resonance of the air column inside it.
The length of this column is varied by closing or leaving open, a varying number of holes.
Half-holing is employed to play flat or minor notes.
The sa note is obtained by covering the first three holes from the blowing-hole.
Octaves are varied by manipulating ones embouchure and controlling the blowing strength.
The size of a Bansuri affects its pitch.
Longer bansuris with a larger bore have a lower pitch and the slimmer and shorter ones sound higher.
In order to play the diatonic scale on a bansuri, one needs to find where the notes lie.
These techniques are demonstrated by the famous Indian flautist Pt.
Care and maintenance.
Since the bansuri is a natural woodwind instrument, it is prone to cracks and thermal stresses while playing.
Jhoomra is a tala of Hindustani music.
Jhoomra tala has 14 beats.
Tilwada is often used in Kheyal.
Jhoomra tala can be counted like this :.
Or can be counted like this :.
This is arrangement of Jhoomra :.
Dhin | Dha | TiRiKaTa.
Dhin | Dhin | Dha Ge TiRiKaTa.
Tin | Ta | TiRiKaTa.
Dhin | Dhin | Dha Ge | TiRiKaTa.
Theka of Jhoomra can be arranged like this :.
Ravi Shankars Music Festival from India.
Many of the players he had a musical history with already.
The featured singer was once more the sublime Lakshmi Shankar, whose voice soared through three octaves with ease.
Rehearsals and recording.
Performance and album release.
The program for the concert performances was divided into two distinct parts.
All save for shehnai veteran Anant Lal and the ever-serene Kamala Chakravarty would face the at-times hostile audiences in North America.
Despite Harrisons concerns beforehand, the London audience sounds suitably impressed.
Album track listing.
All songs by Ravi Shankar.
Tour set list.
Vijay Ghate is an Indian tabla player.
Ghate was born in Jabalpur, Madhya Pradesh.
He started learning his art at an early age of three in Jabalpur.
He then moved to Mumbai, and learned for over twelve years under Suresh Talwalkar.
Ghate also collaborated with jazz guitarist, Larry Coryell and saxophonist, George Brooks.
The shruti or sruti is a Sanskrit term used in several contexts throughout the history of Indian music.
A shruti is considered the smallest interval of pitch that the human ear can detect.
Ancient period : Grama system.
Bharata uses shruti to mean the interval between two notes such that the difference between them is perceptible.
He formulates jatis, which are classes of melodic structures.
These can be further grouped into two gramas -- shadja-grama and madhyama-grama.
The notes are separated by intervals, which are measured in terms of shrutis.
Bharata also describes an experiment to obtain the correct physical configuration of shruti in shadja grama, Sarana Chatushtai.
The madhyama-grama is the same, but the panchama has to be diminished by one shruti.
That is, the panchama of madhyama-grama is lower than that of shadja-grama by one shruti according to Bharata.
Shruti is only mentioned as a perceptual measure in the music of Bharatas time.
Shruti is better understood with the following explanation.
In both the gramas, Ri is three shrutis away from Sa - there are three perceptible intervals between Sa and Ri.
The third of these is called trishruti rishabha.
Likewise, the second interval is called dvishruti rishabha, and the first ekashruti rishabha.
Notes at nine and 13 shrutis from each other are mutually samvadi.
The notes that are at the distance of two and 20 shrutis are mutually vivadi.
The remaining ones, at the distance between 2 and 20 shrutis, are called anuvadi.
The table below shows the Harmonic scales into shruti :.
As it show, the harmonics in scales of shruti are multiples of prime numbers 2, 3, 5 and 19.
Theres not multiples of 7, 11, 13, 17, 23, etc., just of 19 so thats too weird.
Medieval period : Mela system.
By the time Venkatamakhin formulated the melakarta system, the grama system was no longer in use.
Unlike the grama system, the mela system uses the same starting swara.
For example, the intervals of kakali-nishada and shuddha-madhyama would vary depending on the dhaivata and the gandhara that precede them, respectively.
The interval of kakali-nishada would be of three different shruti values depending on whether shuddha, panca-sruti or shat-shruti-dhaivata preceded it.
Thus shruti as a measure of interval is not fully utilized in the mela system.
Modern period : Controversy.
The mela system still prevails.
The term shruti in current practice of Carnatic music, has several meanings.
It is used by musicians in several contexts.
The Telugu term Sruti chusukko is a way to correspond with the accompanying artists to tune their instruments.
The term has also undergone a gross misunderstanding.
It was also wrongly attributed to Bharata, who proposed shruti in a completely different context.
Each shruti may be approximated in 53EDO system.
Babul Mora Naihar Chhooto Jaye.
Babul Mora Naihar Chhooto Jaye is a popular Hindustani classical music song in Raag Bhairavi.
It was also popularised by the legendary classical vocalist, Pandit Bhimsen Joshi.
Jagjit and Chitra Singh also sang a version of the song in film Avishkaar, set to music by Kanu Roy.
The Hindi text and its English translation :.
baabul moraa, naihr chuutto hii jaae.
caar khaar mil, morii ddoliyaa sjaaveN.
aaNgnaa to prbt bhyo aur dehrii bhyii bidesh.
O My father !.
Im leaving home.
The four bearers lift my palanquin.
Im leaving those who were my own.
Your courtyard is now like a mountain, and the threshold, a foreign country.
I leave your house, father, I am going to my beloveds country.
Jayateerth Mevundi, born in 1972, is a Hindustani classical vocalist of the Kirana Gharana.
He is widely recognized as one of the leading performers in this gharana.
Jayateerth Mevundi hails from Hubli in North Karnataka.
His music is marked by impeccable taankari, delivered with effortless ease in the style of Bhimsen Joshi.
He took to music at a very tender age under the guidance of his mother.
He started his formal training in classical music from Sangeet Ratna Pt.
Arjunsa Nakod and also underwent training from Late Pt.
Shripati Padigar, a disciple of Pt Bhimsen Joshi.
Formerly associated with All India Radio, Goa and All India Radio Bangalore, he currently works for All India Radio, Mangalore.
He has travelled extensively to perform, within India and outside.
He has been invited to perform at prestigious venues like the Sawai Gandharva Festival held in Pune every year.
Scholarships and awards.
Jasraj on 9 April 2007 in Delhi.
Ustad Rafique Khan.
Rafique Khan often referred to by the title Ustad is an Indian musician and composer who plays the sitar.
He belongs to the sixth generation of musicians from the Gwalior Gharana.
Khan is the younger brother of Ustad Bale Khan and Chhote Rahimat Khan and has a twin brother, Shafique.
Early life and education.
Khan was born in Dharwad and started playing the sitar at the age of nine.
He was tutored by his father and also by his elder brother, Ustad Bale Khan.
He was also trained in Gayaki Ang by his uncle Ustad Dastagir Khan.
He passed his music exams from Gandharva Mahavidyalaya, Mumbai and completed his graduation in philosophy at the University of Goa.
Khan has toured across the nation and the world, performing at various music festivals.
Khan has also toured across Italy, Slovenia and France performing at Hindustani Classical Music festivals.
Rafique Khan currently works at All India Radio, Mangalore.
Chandrakant Kamat was a Hindustani classical tabla player of the Benares Tabla Gharana.
Early life and training.
Kamat was born in Dhule to a Saraswat Brahmin family with strong musical traditions.
His father, Master Shantaram Kamat was a renowned Natyageet musician.
Kamat learned from gurus Raghunath Shivalkar, Rambhau Vasht, and D. Y. Kadam and also trained in Indian classical dance.
In 1964, Kamat became a Gandabandhan disciple of Samta Prasad of the Benares gharana.
From 1956 to 1991, Kamat also provided Tabla accompaniment in Sangeet Nataks that featured artists like Smt.
Hirabai Badodekar, Smt.
Jyotsna Bhole, Chhota Gandharva, Shripadrao Nevrekar.
During this time, Kamat also worked as a staff artist for AIR, Pune.
Awards and recognition.
Death and Legacy.
On the morning of Monday June 28, 2010, Kamat died of a cardiac arrest.
Kamats performances also extend to programs on Bhavgeet, Lavani, Thumri, and most notably Geet Ramayan.
Kamat holds the record for performing at the Sawai Gandharva Music Festival for fifty consecutive years.
Sanjoy Bandopadhyay is a Bengali Hindustani classical sitar player.
He is primarily a disciple of Radhika Mohan Maitra and Bimalendu Mukherjee.
His performance is a unique synthesis of Senia-Shahjehanpur, Rampur-Senia and Etawah gharana.
He is Chair Professor at the Department of Instrumental Music, of Rabindra Bharati University, Kolkata India.
He is also the Director, S.M. Tagore Centre of Documentation & Research of Languishing & Obsolescent Musical Instruments.
This centre is created for ethnological mapping of the world through obsolescent musical instruments.
The project will run with scholars support from all over the world.
Professor Bandopadhyay visited the University of Illinois at Urban Champaign as George A. Miller Visiting Professor.
In the same year he also visited the University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada as Distinguished India Focus Visitor.
He was specially invited to present paper at the International Conference at the University of Amsterdam.
He is also involved in a number in collaborative research projects at the national and international levels.
Professor Bandopadhyay is currently going through international music collaboration with Professor Yaroslav Senyshin, the exceptional pianist.
Prof. Senyshyn is attached to the Simon Fraser University, Canada as a Professor.
He has produced 10 CDs and a DVD.
He has widely performed in India, American, European and African continents.
The esraj is a string instrument found in two forms throughout the north, central, and east regions of India.
It is a young instrument by Indian terms, being only about 200 years old.
Its name is translated as robber of the heart.
Originally an Afghan Instrument it first appeared in the region during the Pashtun rule of Northern India.
The Dilruba was then produced to replace the previously heavy instrument.
This attempt was intended to scale down the Taus into what is now known to be the Dilruba.
This made it more convenient for the Sikh army to carry the instrument on horseback.
This neck holds on a long wooden rack of 12-15 sympathetic strings.
All strings are metal.
The soundboard is a stretched piece of goatskin similar to what is found on a sarangi.
Sometimes the instrument has a gourd affixed to the top for balance or for tone enhancement.
It is played with a bow, with the other hand moving along the strings above the frets.
The player may slide the note up or down to achieve the portamento, or meend, characteristic of Indian music.
The esraj is mostly used as an accompanying instrument.
It is the accompanying instrument of choice for Rabindra Sangeet singing.
However, it has also been used as a solo instrument to interpret Hindustani Classical Music, mostly in the Vishnupur tradition.
Additionally, the esraj is a more modern invention from the Dilruba that was made and promoted by the Namdharis.
Both the dilruba and the esraj had been declining in popularity for many decades.
By the 1980s the instrument was nearly extinct.
However with the rising influence of the Gurmat Sangeet movement, these instruments are once again attracting considerable attention.
Possibly the most famous exponent of the esraj has been Pandit Ranadhir Ray, who died in 1988.
Today, the best known exponent is Buddhadeb Das, also from Santiniketan.
One of his leading student is Dattatreya Ghosh, reading in Nava Nalanda High School of there.
In South India, the most famous exponent in the film industry to play Dilruba was Dilruba Shanmugham.
A great dilruba player, he has been conferred with the Kalaimamani award by the Tamilnadu Government.
He has played innumerous scores on Dilruba for legends like MSV and Ilayaraja.
Ravi Shankar played the Dilruba in the 1930s, as a member of the dance group of his older brother Uday Shankar.
Indian physicist and mathematician S. N. Bose is also known to play it.
Famous Bollywood music director Roshan was also a noted Esraj player.
Shivaranjani or Sivaranjani is a musical scale used in Indian classical music.
There are two scales, one each in Hindustani music and Carnatic music.
The Hindustani raga is a pentatonic scale, while the Carnatic scale is a sampoorna scale.
The Hindustani raga Shivaranjani belongs to the Kaafi thaat in terms of classification of the scale.
Its structure is as follows.
The komal gandhar in place of shuddh gandhar is the difference between this raga and the global musical scale of Bhoop.
Borrowed into Carnatic music.
This Hindustani scale is also the currently popular scale in Carnatic music.
This scale is a janya ragam, as it does not have all the seven swaras.
It is a symmetric ragam that does not contain madhyamam or nishadam.
It is an audava-audava ragam in Carnatic music classification.
Its structure using swaras in Carnatic music notation is as follows.
Shivaranjani ragam brings out karuna rasa and lends itself for elaboration and exploration.
It has many compositions in classical music and in film songs.
The popular Hindi film song Jaane kahan gaye woh din is based on this scale.
Kannum Kannum from the movie Thiruda Thiruda is regarded as the most different song done in this raga.
In Carnatic music, two ragamalikas start with a refrain in Shivaranjani.
M S Subbulakshmi made Kurai onrum illai very popular which begins with this scale.
Another composition Muiyakka muiyakka, by Purandaradasa, also begins with this scale.
Another famous composition in this raaga is Jagat janani rendered in Tamil language.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Shivaranjanis notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields 2 other pentatonic ragams, namely, Sunadavinodini and Revati.
See Graha bhedam on Shivaranjani for more details and an illustration.
The Carnatic scale Shivaranjani is a janya ragam associated with the 64th parent scale Vachaspati.
It has vakra prayoga and its scale is as follows.
The compositions in this scale are :.
Sangit Makarand is an ancient work on classical music written by Narada.
Its main feature is the treatiment of Ragas ; categorizing them as male, female and neuter.
The treatise circa 1100 CE is the earliest text where rules similar to the current Hindustani classical music can be found.
The three distinct stages.
It also hints on the uniqueness of the raga-nomenclaturing.
On close study of it, one learns of three distinct stages on the nomenclaturing of the Indian ragas.
Sound of the Sitar.
Sound of the Sitar is an LP by Hindustani classical musician Ravi Shankar.
It was released in 1965 on vinyl.
It was later digitally remastered and released in CD format through Angel Records.
Pandit Narasimhalu Vadavati.
Pandit Narasimhalu Vadavati is a clarinet musician.
Pandit Narasimhalu Vadavati was born in 1942 in Vadavati, a small village in Raichur taluk of Karnataka, India.
Sri Matamari Veeranna was his first Guru.
He learned Hindustani classical music under the guidance of Gwalior and Jaipur Gharana exponent late Pandit Siddarama Jambaladinni.
He was nominated as president of the World Music Festival 2011 organized at Los Angeles by World Clarinet Association.
The International Biographical Centre, Cambridge, U.K. has now listed him in its International Who 's Who in Music.
His fame shot to new heights when he directed music for the award winning French Documentary  Hathi.
Pandit Wadavati was born in 1942 in a small village, Wadavati in Raichur Taluk.
His love for music grew from his early boyhood years.
He learned Hindustani classical music from the late Pandit Siddarama Jambladinni a famous vocalist belonging to the Gwalior and Jaipur Gharanas.
After intensive practice for more than 10 years he became familiar with the intricacies and was able to give solo recitals.
With a streak of experimentation in him after years of arduous practice he mastered playing the Clarinet adapting to Hindustani Music.
He can produce the elongated drawl of the  vilambit  portion of the gharanas in a sonorous manner.
His subtle nuance has earned him applause among the music fraternity.
Chairman - Karnataka Sangeetha Nrutya Academy - Govt.
Doctorate award from Gulburga University.
Surmani title by Sur singer samsad, Bombay.
Karnataka Kala Tilak title by Karnataka Music and Dance Academy.
Gold Medal and Asthan Vidwan title by Shri Sharada Peetha of Shringeri Mutt by Sri Jagadguru Srimad Bharati Theertha Swamiji.
Bharatha Ratna Visweswaraiah Award by Engineering Pratistana, Bangalore in the year 1996-97.
Participation in Kannada Koota Conference in USA in 1997.
Karnataka Rajyothsava Award by Karnataka Government for 1997-98.
Music Direction to French film HAATHI in 1998.
Visiting Professor to California University.
Participation in Clarionet concert in CalArts, USA in 1998.
Honored and considered as an Outstanding Artist of the 20th Century by International Biographical Center, Cambridge.
Honored at the 68th Akhila Bharathiya Kannada Sahithya Sammelna, Bagalkot, Karnataka.
Honored with the title Hindustani Clarionet Sangeetha Ratna by Government Music College, Coimbatore, Government of Tamil Nadu.
Concert at Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, England.
Member, Experts Committee, Cultural Department, Govt.
Member, Music and Dance Academy, Govt.
In San Francisco.
In San Francisco is a live album by Hindustani classical musician Ravi Shankar.
It was released in 1967 on vinyl.
It was later digitally remastered and released in CD format through Angel Records.
Roshan Ara Begum.
Roshan Ara Begum was a Hindustani classical vocalist.
In Pakistan she is revered as Mallika-e-Mauseeqi.
As the daughter of Ustad Abdul Haqq Khan, Roshan Ara linked through her cousin Ustad Abdul Karim Khan to Kirana Gharana.
Early life and training.
In Mumbai, she lived in a sprawling bungalow with her husband Chaudhry Mohammed Hussain, a police officer.
Her singing features a full-throated voice, short and delicate passages of sur, lyricism, romantic appeal and swift taans.
All these flourishes were combined in her unique style that reached its peak from 1945 to 1982.
Her vigorous style of singing was interspersed with bold strokes and layakari.
Roshan Ara Begum also sang some film songs, mostly under music composers like Anil Biswas, Feroze Nizami and Tassaduq Hussain.
She sang for well-known films such as Pahali Nazar, , Qismat, Roopmati Baazbahadur and Neela Parbat.
She died in Pakistan in 1982 at the approximate age of sixty-five.
Shubha Mudgal is a well-known Indian singer of Hindustani classical music, Khayal, Thumri, Dadra, and popular Indian Pop music.
She is also close to movements like ANHAD and SAHMAT.
Born in an academic family to Skand and Jaya Gupta in Allahabad, Uttar Pradesh.
Both her parents were Professors of English Literature at Allahabad University, with deep interest in Classical Hindustani Music and Kathak.
Her paternal grandfather, Prof. P. C. Gupta was also a Professor at Allahabad University.
She attended St. Marys Convent Inter College.
As a young girl she started learning Kathak in Allahabad following the foot steps of her sister.
She once replied to a dance examiners routine query of Aap kis gharaane ki naachti hain ?.
with the retort, Hum apne gharaane ki naachte hain.
She later switched to Hindustani Classical Music as her vocation of choice while maintaining the same individualistic attitude.
Her first traditional teacher was Pandit Ramashreya Jha in Allahabad.
Shubha moved to New Delhi, and enrolled at the Delhi University.
She continued her musical education under Pandit Vinaya Chandra Mudgalya at the urging of her first guru.
Shubha Mudgal started performing as a Hindustani classical singer in the 1980s, and gained a certain reputation as a talented singer.
In the 1990s, she started experimenting with other forms of music, including pop and fusion varieties.
She says, I believe in music.
Khayal and Thumri are my favourites, but that does not mean that I should not experiment with other forms.
Why should I curtail my musical urges ?.
asks the singer and adds, I want to allow the artist in me to come through.
In addition to her recordings and concerts, she briefly ran a website called raagsangeet.com aimed at lovers of Classical Indian Music.
Mudgal sang the title track of Star Plus s No. 1 serial Diya Aur Baati Hum along with Kailash Kher.
It is a very soulful, classical - based Rajasthani folk song.
After graduating from University, Shubha married Pt.
Mudgalyas son Mukul Mudgal who was a promising lawyer.
Shubha Mudgal however got divorced from him, and married Aneesh Pradhan.
Her only son from her previous marriage, Dhaval, is a member of a Delhi-based band and a promising poker player.
Sadhakam or Sadhana in Carnatic music.
It is followed rigorously by the students as well as exponents of vocal as well as dancing forms.
Bhopali, also known as Bhoop, Bhoopali or Bhupali, is a Hindustani classical raga.
It is a pentatonic scale.
Most of the songs in this raga are based on Bhakti rasa.
The same raga in Carnatic music is known as Mohanam.
Writing about the musical theory of Indian classical music is fraught with complications.
There is no universally accepted set of rules or formal method of writing notations.
However, the Bhatkhande and Paluskar paddhatis are the two ways of writing down musical notations.
Aroha & Avaroha.
The scale of Bhopali uses only Shuddh swaras.
Vadi & Samavadi.
Gandhar - Ga.
Dhaivat - Dha.
Pakad & Chalan.
The Pakad is :.
Some chalans are :.
S R G R S D1 S R G. 2.
S R G R S D1 P1.
P1 D1 S R G R G. 4.
S R P G. 5.
G R S R G P. 6.
G P D P D D S '.
P G P D P D S ' R ' G ' R ' G '.
G ' R ' S ' D P G R S. Note : Normally written swaras indicate the middle octave.
A swara immediately followed by 1 indicates the mandra saptak and indicates the taar saptak.
This bandish is bound with Teentaal.
1 2 3 4 | 5 6 7 8 | 9 10 11 12 | 13 14 15 16 |.
D2 S D2 P | G2 R2 S R2 |.
G2 _ G2 P | G2 R2 S _ |.
S R2 G2 P | R2 G2 P D2 |.
G2 P D2 P | G2 R2 S _ |.
G2 _ G2 G2 | P _ D2 P |.
S _ SS | D3 R3 S _ |.
G3 G3 R3 S | R3 R3 S D3 |.
S _ D2 P | G2 R2 S _ |.
The Asthayi starts with the 9th beat.
Organization & relationships.
Raga Bhoopali belongs to the Kalyan Thaat.
Related ragas : Deshkar.
Behavior refers to practical aspects of the music.
It is complicated to talk about this for Hindustani music since many of the concepts are fluid, changing, or archaic.
The following information can not be accurate, but it can attempt to reflect how the music existed.
Evening or Sandhya.
Certain ragas have seasonal associations.
E ri Aaj Bhaeelawa.
Jab Se Tumi San Lagali - Kishori Amonkar.
Sahela Re - Kishori Amonkar.
Film Songs based on Bhopali.
Jyoti Kalash Chhalke.
Rao, Suvarnalata ; der Meer, Wim van ; Harvey, Jane The Raga Guide : A Survey of 74 Hindustani Ragas.
Zenith Media, London : 1999.
In the notation of Indian raga, a solfege-like system called sargam is used.
As in Western solfege, there are names for the seven basic pitches of a major scale.
The tonic of any scale is named Sa, and the dominant Pa.
Sa is fixed in any scale, and Pa is fixed at a fifth above it.
These two notes are known as achala swar.
Re, Ga, Dha and Ni all have altered partners that are a half-step lower.
Ma has an altered partner that is a half-step higher.
Re, Ga, ma, Dha and Ni are called vikrut swar.
In the written system of Indian notation devised by Ravi Shankar, the pitches are represented by Western letters.
Capital letters are used for the achala swar, and for the higher variety of all the vikrut swar.
Lowercase letters are used for the lower variety of the vikrut swar.
Sunanda Patnaik is an Indian classical singer of Gwalior gharana from Odisha.
Popularly known as guruma, she is considered one of the great dames of Hindustani music.
She is the daughter of legendary Oriya poet Baikunthanath Patnaik.
She started singing at All India Radio in Cuttack in 1948 at the age of 14.
Once, President Rajendra Prasad heard her at Puri.
He was very impressed with her singing and arranged her training under Pandit Vinayak Rao Pattavardhan at Pune with a scholarship.
She was awarded with the degree of Masters in Music by Pune School in 1956.
She has been staying at Kolkata since 1983.
She received Odisha Sangeet Natak Akademi award in 1970-71.
She received Indian lifetime achievement award in 2009 and lifetime achievement award from The Orissa society of the Americas in 2012.
She is the recipient of sangeet natak academy award for the year 2012.
In popular culture.
Nilamadhada is a National Film Award - winning documentary film about her.
The film was directed by Sri Dilip Patnaik and produced by Films Division.
It won the Best Biographical documentary for the year 2010 at the 58th National Film Awards in India.
Anindo Chatterjee is an Indian tabla player from Farukhabad gharana.
He was born in a musical family.
His uncle Pt.
Debiprasad Chatterjee is an eminent sitar player of this country.
His younger sister Smt.
Keka Mukherjee is a leading sitar player of AIR and also well known for her solo performance.
He is a disciple of Pt.
Jnan Prakash Ghosh.
Inspired by his uncle, Pandit Biswanath Chatterjee, Chatterjee began playing tabla at the age of five.
He performed at Rashtrapati Bhavan when U.S. President Barack Obama visited India in November 2010.
Chatterjee received the Sangeet Natak Akademi Award for 2002.
Pritam Bhattacharjee is an Indian classical vocalist.
He sings in Hindustani style of music.
He was born to Monjushree Bhattacharjee, a musician.
He was trained under Amarendra Chakraborty until the age of 14.
He also trained under Pandit Jasraj.
Pritam started his career after training under Pandit Jasraj.
He has performed solos in many concerts and festivals in India and abroad.
He is a teacher at the Pandit Jasraj School of Music Foundation, Atlanta Chapter.
Bhaskar Nath is an Indian classical instrumentalist.
He plays the Shehnai beloning to Meerut Shehnai Gharana.
He is a child prodigy.
His uncle is Pandit Jagannath, a renowned Shehnai player.
He started learning Shehanai and Harmonium since young age under guidance of his grandfather Om Prakash.
He is schooling at Delhi Public School.
He is training under legendary vocalist Pandit Jasraj.
Bhaskar Nath gave his first solo performance at the age of 10.
His renders in Ragas in Gayaki ang, Banarasi dhun, Thumri, Chaiti, Kajri and a special in Tappa.
Bhaskar Nath belongs to a family of renowned musicians of Meerut Shehnai Gharana.
Om Prakash, his paternal uncle, the Late.
Jagannath who was an internationally acclaimed Shehnai Vadak and his father the renowned vocalist of Kirana Gharana, Pt.
He is currently learning the fine nuances of music under Guru Shishya Parampra from  Padam Vibhushan  Sangeet Marthond, Pt.
Bhaskar Nath has performed in many prestigious concerts.
His performances have received rave reviews from press and public alike.
Bhaskar Nath has imbided his paternal uncle, Pt.
A few of the concerts where Bhaskar Nath has performed are as follows : -.
Bhaskar Nath at Epic Center Gurgaon.
Bhaskar Baba Vishwanath Sangeet Samaroh, Delhi.
Bhaskar Nath Interview by THE HINDU NEWSPAPER.
Bhaskar Nath Sawai Gandharv Pune.
Bhaskar Nath Pune Music Circle.
Bhaskar Nath, Times Of India.
Bhaskar Nath, Encyclopedia.
Bhaskar Nath, Zee Tv.
Premadasa Hegoda is a Sri Lankan sitarist.
He has lived in Japan since 1974.
Hegoda studied with Ravi Shankar.
He is an associate professor of Music at the University of Tokyo and also teaches Indian music at Takasaki Art College.
He also operates the Premadasa Institute of Indian Music in Tokyo.
Munawar Ali Khan.
Munawar Ali Khan was a Hindustani classical singer of the Patiala Gharana.
He was the son of the maestro Bade Ghulam Ali Khan.
He was taught by his father Bade Ghulam Ali Khan and his uncle Barkat Ali Khan.
Munawar also learnt Dhrupad from Hussainuddin Dagar.
Munawar had a full-throated voice with open aakar and his style differed from his fathers quicksilver style.
He was an A-grade artist at All India Radio.
He also joined Bharatiya Kala Kendra in Delhi as a music teacher.
He performed in major music festivals in India and abroad.
He toured extensively in Germany, Switzerland, U.K., France, Australia and represented India in Afghanistan in 1986 and in Pakistan in 1984.
He has several discs to his credit both in India and abroad, released by Audiorec, HMV, EMI Music and Sony Nad.
With Sandhya Mukherjee he also sang for a Bengali film Jaijawanti.
He created many khyal and thumri bandishes as well as geets and ghazals.
Munawar Ali Khan died at age of 59 in Kolkata on 13 October 1989.
Taufiq Qureshi is an Indian classical musician.
He is a percussionist and a composer.
Born in Mumbai, to legendary tabla player, Ustad Alla Rakha.
His eldest brother is tabla player, Ustad Zakir Hussain.
He received guidance from Ghatam Vidhwan, Pandit Vikku Vinayakram.
Taufiq Quereshi started his career early.
He collaborates with various classical artists for fusion concerts.
This quality makes him one of the most sought after rhythm-programmers, arranger-composers and percussionists in the world of studio recordings.
He plays a variety of percussion instruments like djembe, duff, bongos, batajon.
Taufiq has done pioneering work on the African drum - Djembe.
He is the first artiste to have developed a unique rhythmic language to adapt the Tabla syllables on the Djembe.
Taufiq 's trademark style incorporates body and vocal percussions to create unique rhythmic motifs spanning across cultures.
His sense of tone and command over a wide variety of percussion instruments is phenomenal.
For over a decade, he has been imparting training to deserving students, some of whom are now making their mark.
GOLD at the CANNES FILM FESTIVAL for Best Music for the INDIAN RAILWAYS JINGLE.
GOLD at the LONDON INTERNATIONAL AWARDS - LasVegas for Original Music for the NIKE JINGLE - Parallel Journey.
Taufiq Qureshi is married to Geetika Varde, a renowned vocalist of the Jaipur-Atrauli gharana.
The Raga Guide.
The Raga Guide is a 1999 Nimbus Records compilation of 74 Hindustani ragas on four CDs.
The 1610 plates are painted in the Mughal style.
The featured artists are Vidyadhar Vyas, Shruti Sadolikar-Katkar, Buddhadev Das Gupta, and Hariprasad Chaurasia.
Dilshad Khan is a Bengali Hindustani classical singer of the Patiala Gharana.
Early life and background.
Dilshad Khan was born Arabinda Dasgupta in Kolkata, the second son of civil servant P M Dasgupta and Bhabani Dasgupta.
He was named as Arabinda Dasgupta.
Dilshad is the younger brother of eminent sarod maestro Buddhadev Das Gupta.
He attended St. Xaviers Collegiate School, Kolkata, where future music composer R. D. Burman was his classmate.
He was inspired by Ustad Bade Ghulam Ali Khan.
After moving permanently to Mumbai Khan became a disciple of eminent Kirana gharana vocalist Padmashree Ustad Faiyaz Ahmed Khan.
He gave up a lucrative career as a marine engineer.
Dilshad Khan started singing early.
Dilshad Khan is married to classical vocalist, Parveen Sultana.
They have a daughter.
Sawai Gandharva Bhimsen Festival, Hyderabad.
Sawai Gandharva Bhimsen Festival edition of the festival is also held in Hyderabad, India at the historical Chowmahalla Palace.
It was organised for the first time in Hyderabad in February 2012.
It is organised by Mohan Hemmadi and Abhijit Bhattacharjee.
It was decided to make it an annual event in Hyderabad like the Pune edition, and possibly an all-night event.
Vilayat Hussain Khan.
Ustad Vilayat Hussain Khan Sahib was a prominent musician of the Agra Gharana, who excelled both as singer and teacher.
His father, Natthan Khan, was himself an acclaimed performing artist of his time, and a noted guru.
Vilayat Hussain Khans elder brothers were also noted singers and taught him after their fathers early death.
Abdullah Khan was Natthan Khans son who was several years senior to his brother Vilayat.
Vilayat Hussain Khan, the singer, is not to be confused with the famous and controversial sitar player Vilayat Khan.
His most famous guru-shishya relationship was with Jagannathbuwa Purohit and each of them composed several bandishes dedicated to the other.
Vilayat Khans singing from his later years is available through commercial releases and private collectors.
Vilayat Hussain Khan composed bandishes in many ragas including some very rare ones under the nome de plume Pran Piya.
After his fathers death, he was trained by his uncles Kallan Khan and Mohammad Baksh.
His most famous guru-shishya relationship was with Jagannathbuwa Purohit and each of them composed several bandishes dedicated to each other.
His son Yunus Hussain Khan is a prominent name in Agra Gharana as well.
Yogesh Samsi is an Indian tabla player.
Yogesh Samsi born to renowned vocalist Pandit Dinkar Kaikini.
His father the eminent vocalist Dinkar Kaikini initiated Yogesh at the age of six.
At the age of four he started learning the tabla from Pandit H. Taranth Rao.
Later, he sought the guidance of Ustad Allarakha Khan, one of the greatest percussionists.
He spent 23 years under the tutelage of Allarakha.
He strives to keep up his revered Gurus word of preserving the tradition in the presentation of tabla solo.
He also appeared in the first episode of Idea Jalsa with Shivkumar Sharma & Takahiro Arai.
Swarmandals measure from twenty-four to thirty inches in length and twelve to fifteen inches in width.
The singer may choose to employ any number of strings from 21 to 36.
Wooden pegs were used instead of metal ones in the medieval period.
This ridge functions as a bridge on both sides.
The swarmandal is similar to the autoharp or zither in many respects.
It was also used in the song Across the Universe from the Let It Be album.
David Immerglucks surname is Austrian, and roughly translates from German as always lucky.
His nickname is Immy, often coupled with the slang phrase gim me.
Immergluck began playing music in the San Francisco Bay area.
He early began to experiment with different sounds and a growing interest in instruments beyond just the guitar.
Monks of Doom and Camper Van Beethoven.
Formed in 1986, the Monks of Doom somehow fused post-punk sensibilities with prog rock decadence and folk tradition and elegance.
One Allmusic critic compared their work to pop experimentalists Frank Zappa and Syd Barrett.
Bassist Victor Krummenacher noted, We were interested in doing slightly more outside music that had heavier and more progressive tendencies.
It was an outside expansion, a chance to go wherever our imagination took us.
Both groups have since reformed - Camper Van Beethoven in 1999, and the Monks of Doom in 2003.
Because of other musical projects, he initially functioned only as a session player.
Since 1999, Immergluck has been a permanent member of the band, touring and recording.
Other musical work.
Immergluck joined another band, Glider, during the time he was contributing to the Monks of Doom.
In 2013, Immergluck appeared on the opening track of Joseph Arthur s tenth studio album, The Ballad of Boogie Christ.
Extensive description of instruments on the official website in the infobox :.
Immergluck has listed a variety of musicians who were influences on his music.
Kuldeep Joshi is a blind Indian student from Rajasthan who continuously played the tabla for 12 hours, setting a record.
He is a native of Padardi bari, Dungarpur district in Rajasthan.
Kuldeep Joshi lost his eyesight at the age of eight.
His father Manshankar Joshi is a physical education teacher, and his mother Sarada Devi is a housewife.
He has two brothers : one working in Mumbai, in Pune, the other is studying to be a Chartered Accountant.
He also said that Joshi is the first handicapped person in India to continuously play the tabla for 12 hours.
Kuldeeps father considered his sons achievement as Asaram Bapu s blessing.
Anupama Bhagwat is an Indian sitar player.
Early life and education.
Bhagwat was born in Bhilai, India.
She was introduced to playing sitar at the age of nine by her uncle.
Bhagwat performed in India and the United States.
She is based in the United States, and married.
Bhagwat continues to train as a sitarist and listens to Indian classical singers to improve her technique.
Sitar in jazz.
Later jazz recordings containing sitar music include albums by Miles Davis, Alice Coltrane, Yusef Lateef, Joe Harriott, and Ornette Coleman.
Early uses of the sitar in Jazz.
The track is remarkable for little else ; it is simply Western film music with the sitar playing the melody.
Tony Scott recorded a track entitled Portrait of Ravi on his Dedications album, as early as 1957.
Coltrane met Shankar in 1965 after a long period of mutual admiration and letter writing.
In America, the profile of the sitar in Jazz was maintained by Collin Walcott.
Walcott was heavily influenced by John Coltrane s Quartet.
Walcott created a sitar technique which is not found in Indian music.
This involves stopping more than one string to create harmonies, usually thirds.
In the Nineties, Nishat Khan was working on his own Jazz project.
The group did not perform in public, and the recording was not released.
In 2006, Andrew Cheshire released Silent Trees Falling, an album composed solely of.
electric sitar in a mostly trio setting.
Widely regarded as an unheralded master of jazz.
guitar, Cheshire combined raw jazz improvisation with an eastern flavored vocabulary resulting.
in a record that captures the spontaneity of jazz coupled with the sonority of the far east.
Comparative view of jazz and Indian classical music.
Indian music is the greatest tradition of improvisation in the East.
Coltrane was fascinated by Indian music.
Both Jazz and Indian music are commonly described as improvised music but in fact, composition is integral to both arts.
One of the functions of the composition is to define the structure upon which the improvisation is based.
If the soloist wishes to change to a new tal or tempo it is signalled by playing a different gat.
The presentation of the two main instruments in jugalbandi has become common both in India and outside.
The standard form of a jazz performance would start with the ` head which might be 32 bars long.
Then, the musicians would take it in turn to improvise over this cyclic structure.
The performance ends with a recapitulation of the head.
Improvisations in both musics take place within cyclic frameworks, with the notable exception of free jazz which consciously eschews predetermined structures.
The ability to learn to use these frameworks to assist and inspire improvisation is really the essence of both art forms.
Being able to maintain ones place in the tal is precisely analogous to keeping the form in Jazz playing.
This is a chronological catalogue of recordings which have featured the sitar within a jazz context.
Ravi Shankar, Kanai Dutta, Modu Mullick, Harihar Rao, Bud Shank, Dennis Budimur, Gary Peacock, Louis Hayes.
Improvisation on the Theme Music from Pather Pancali.
Hollywood, California, 1961.
Liberty Records Ltd, London 830 76 E. Ravi Shankar, Paul Horn.
World Pacific, 1432.
Joe Harriott, Eddie Blair, Pat Smythe, Rick Laird, Allan Ganley, John Mayer, Diwan Motihar, Chris Taylor, Keshav Sathe, Chandrhas Paigankar.
EMI Records 1966 6025.
Irene Shweitzer, ,, Diwan Motihar, ,.
Double record set.
Joe Harriott, Shake Keane, Coleridge Goode, Allan Ganley, John Mayer, Diwan Motihar, Chandrahas Paigankar, Keshav Sathi, Chris Taylor.
Double-Up Duos 1968.
Joe Harriott, Kenny Wheeler, Pat Smythe, Coleridge Goode, Jackie Dougan, John Mayer, Diwan Motihar, Chandrahas Paigankar, Keshav Sathi, Chris Taylor.
Song Before Sunrise.
Double-Up Duos 1968.
Ustad Rais Khan, Manohari Singh, John Pereira, Lucilla, Leslie Godinho, Eddie Travers, Dilip Naik, Anibal Castro, Suman, Ramakant, Dattaram, Sebastian DSouza.
Music by Shankar Jaikishan.
Raga Tilak Kamod.
Raga Miyan Malhav.
Raga Mishra Pilu.
Gramophone Company of India Ltd 2377.
John Mayer, Chris Taylor, Ian Hamer, Tony Coe, Pat Smythe, Coleridge Goode, John Marshall, Diwan Motihar, Viram Jasani, Kevan.
Intro and Rondo.
all titles published by Lupur Music Ltd.
Tony Scott, Collin Walcott.
Verve Records 1969.
McCandless, Glen Moore, Ralph Towner, Collin Walcott.
Vanguard Records 1970.
Miles Davis, Collin Walcott.
Columbia Records 1972 31906.
Paul Winter, Collin Walcott.
McCandless, Glen Moore, Ralph Towner, Collin Walcott.
Vanguard Records 79326.
McCandless, Glen Moore, Ralph Towner, Collin Walcott.
Song for a Friend.
Vanguard Records 1974 79341.
Collin Walcott, John Abercrombie, Dave Holland, Jack DeJohnette.
Ludwigsburg, W. Germany, March 1975.
ECM Records 1976 1062.
McCandless, Glen Moore, Ralph Towner, Collin Walcott.
Become, Seem, Appear.
The Silence of a Candle.
New York, April 8 & 9, 1975.
Vanguard Records 1976 79358.
McCandless, Glen Moore, Ralph Towner, Collin Walcott.
Vanguard Records 1976.
McCandless, Glen Moore, Ralph Towner, Collin Walcott.
Vanguard Records 1977.
New York, 1970-74.
Collin Walcott, John Abercrombie, Don Cherry, Palle Danielson, Dom Um Romao.
Song of the Morrow.
Samba Tala Moon Lake.
Oslo, February 1977.
ECM Records 1977 1096.
Egberto Gismonti, Collin Walcott.
ECM Records 1977 1116.
McCandless, Glen Moore, Ralph Towner, Collin Walcott.
McCandless, Glen Moore, Ralph Towner, Collin Walcott.
Vanguard Records 1978.
Collin Walcott, Don Cherry, Nana Vasconcelos.
Like That of Sky.
a  Race Face.
c  Sir Duke.
Ludwigsburg, W. Germany, September 1978.
ECM Records 1979 1132.
Oregon - ` Oregon in Performance.
McCandless, Glen Moore, Ralph Towner, Collin Walcott.
Collin Walcott / Steve Eliovson - ` Dawn Dance.
Collin Walcott, Steve Eliovson.
ECM Records 1981 1198.
Collin Walcott / Don Cherry / Nana Vasconcelos - ` Codona 2.
Collin Walcott, Don Cherry, Nana Vasconcelos, voice.
Walking on Eggs.
Again and Again, Again.
Ludwigsburg, W. Germany, 1980.
ECM Records 1983 1177.
Collin Walcott / Don Cherry / Nana Vasconcelos - ` Codona 3.
Collin Walcott, Don Cherry, Nana Vasconcelos.
Hey Da Ba Doom.
Ludwigsburg, W. Germany, September 1982.
ECM Records 1983 1243.
McCandless, Glen Moore, Ralph Towner, Collin Walcott.
Beside a Brook.
There Was No Moon That Night.
Ludwigsburg, W. Germany, February 1983.
ECM Records 1983, 1258.
McCandless, Glen Moore, Ralph Towner, Collin Walcott.
Ludwigsburg, W. Germany, October 19.
Andrew Cheshire - ` Silent Trees Falling.
Cheshire, Joe Michaels, Jared Lippi, Bhooshit Dikshitar.
Legend of Osiris.
Remember the Malamo.
How to Stuff a Wild Bhairavi.
Silent trees Falling.
Joule Records 2006, 11.
Ananda Shankar was a Bengali musician best known for fusing Western and Eastern musical styles.
He was married to Tanusree Shankar.
He studied in The Scindia School.
Ananda did not learn sitar from his uncle but studied instead with Lalmani Misra at Banaras Hindu University.
In the late 1960s Shankar travelled to Los Angeles, where he played with many contemporary musicians including Jimi Hendrix.
Out of print for many years, Ananda Shankar And His Music was re-released on CD in 2005.
1., featuring the two standout tracks from Ananda Shankar And His Music, Dancing Drums and Streets of Calcutta.
Ananda Shankars only Tamil film as the Music director.
Thanks to Mr.Sridhar of Chitralaya who brought Ananda Shanker to do this Tamil Film.
Walking On was released in 2000 after Shankars sudden death from heart failure the year before.
He is best known for creation of music for schooltime serial Byomkesh Bakshi broadcast on DD Nationals.
Recently, 2010 and 2011, his music has been featured in a number of episodes of popular NBC comedy show Outsourced.
Following is a list of episodes and music featured :.
Episode 103 : Party of Five - 10/7/2010 - Night in the Forest.
Episode 105 : Touched by an Anglo - 10/21/2010 - Dancing Drums.
Episode 106 : Bolloween - 10/28/2010 - Radha -- inst.
Episode 107 : Truly, Madly, Pradeeply - 11/04/2010 - Dancing Drums.
Episode 109 : Temporary Monsanity - 11/18/2010 - Dancing Drums.
Episode 110 : Homesick to my Stomach - 12/02/2010 - Renunciation.
Episode 112 : Sari Charlie - 1/27/2011 - Exploration.
Episode 114 : The Todd Couple - 2/10/2011 - Cyrus.
Pandit Divyang Vakil, is an Indian tabla guru, composer and philosopher.
Vakil began his musical career from early childhood.
At the age of 3, he gave his first performance as the youngest drummer in Gujarat performing with a Gujarati orchestra.
The Tabla Guru.
In 2009, Vakil completed his 30th year of teaching tabla.
He is the founder of Rhythm Riders Music Institute in Ahmedabad, Gujarat.
Students of Vakil have also established tabla schools in places such as Australia, Korea, UK and the US.
His students produce a harmonious compilation of modern and classical aspects of Indian classical music.
They dont only learn the commercial and popular form of Tabla but also distinguish spiritual aspects of it.
Vakil is most well known for his contemporary classical tabla ensemble Talavya.
Through his compositions, Vakil has given a modern form to classical tabla playing.
Talavya currently performs Vakils latest group tabla composition entitled Tabla Ecstasy.
Previous group works include Tabla Tarkhat, Tabla Taandav, Tabla Triveni, etc.
Vakil has composed several full-length instrumental ensemble pieces for the international stage.
One of his most difficult works is Ardha Taal Chakra.
Ardha Taal Chakra explored half-beat Indian rhythm cycles.
Created in 2006, it was recomposed and renamed in 2010 to become Ardha Taal Chakravyuha.
In 2011, he collaborated with renown South Korean musician Yu Kyung-hwa.
The piece debuted in February 2011 at Rhythm Riders Music Institute in Ahmedabad, India.
Early Life and musical training.
Born in a family with a background of Yakshagana tradition, Pt Shripad Hegde was attracted to music at a young age.
In the year 1982 Pt.
Shripad Hegde moved to Dharwad to devote himself fully in the music.
Like his mentor he is eclectic and blends into his style the aesthetics subtleties of other schools of singing.
Though Khyal is his forte, he is equally adept in singing light classical varieties.
His recitals are regularly broadcast from AIR Dharwad.
He has also featured in Sunday night concert of AIR.
Shripad Hegde has rendered several music concerts like Alladiyakhan Punya Samaroh Mumbai, Karnataka Sangha Mumbai, Deenath Mangeshkar Punyatithi.
As a Music Composer.
Apart from being a classical singer Shripad Hegde is also known for his compositions.
Some of them are Shruti Sanjeevini, Divya Sannidi, Prema Sangama, Vachana Vaibhava in light music.
His classical CDs called Parampara and Rageshri have also been released.
As a Teacher.
Shripad Hegde not only established himself as artist of the classical music but also as a Guru.
He has represented himself in conducting many workshops and lectures on music through Kamataka Sangeeta Nritya academy.
Shripad Hegde has followed the noble tradition of teaching.
Thus, he has produced many singers to the world of music.
Pandit Shripad Hegde is the recipient of many honours and awards.
Aryabhata by Aryabhata cultural organisation of Bengaluru ,.
Sanhita Nandi is a prominent Hindustani classical vocalist of the Kirana Gharana.
The central motif of her style is slow tempo raga development and ornamented sargams.
Sanhita Nandi has travelled extensively to perform, both within and outside of India.
Kuljit Bhamra MBE Hon DMus is a British composer, record producer and musician whose main instrument is the tabla.
In July 2010 he was awarded an honorary Doctorate by the University of Exeter.
Early life and influences.
Born in Nairobi, Kenya, in 1959, His grandfather was an Indian artisan sent to Kenya by the British Raj.
Bhamra contracted polio when he was one year old, which affected his left leg.
Bhamra 's father had gone to England to study civil engineering and in 1961 Kuljit and his mother joined him there.
In 1968 they settled in Southall which has been Bhamra 's home town ever since.
In 1986 Bhamra established Keda Records, an independent record label committed to producing high quality cassettes and LPs.
Bhamra was profiled in the 1992 movie Confusion a Black Arts Video Project funded by the Arts Council of Great Britain.
Bhamra finally gave up his career as a civil engineer in 1994 to concentrate on music.
He purchased The Yard recording studio and renamed it Red Fort Studios.
Later in 1999 he became the owner of the whole complex.
He also was dialect coach for the production.
Occasionally, audience members came to the front of the auditorium and danced to his drumming at the end of the show.
It ran from 14 April 2005 till 17 September 2005 at the Shaftesbury Theatre in London.
Projects included Bhangra Latina, the creation of a tabla notation system called Tablature !.
On 17 June 2009 the British Library hosted a discussion evening entitled Southall : Music and Life.
Bhamra led the musical finale of the Liberty Festival in Trafalgar Square on 5 September 2009.
This was the first time that Indian pieces have appeared in the syllabus.
Pieces included Ghazal and Bollywood Love Song.
The University of Exeter awarded Bhamra a Doctorate in Music in July 2010.
Cascade - A jazz collective formed of Aidan O'Rourke, Andy Sheppard, Sheema Mukherjee, Simon Thoumire and Bhamra.
The project was commissioned with funds from the PRS Foundation, Esmee Fairbairn Charitable Trust and Scottish Arts Council.
The performance was also broadcast on BBC Radio 3.
With composer and pianist David Braun-White, Bhamra formed the Ku-Da-Mix Orchestra which debuted at the Scala in December 2006.
Mantra - a collaboration with the Orlando Consort, Jonathan Mayer and Shahid Khan which toured the UK.
An album Mantra was produced along with a set of learning resources for the National Centre for Early Music.
From Hollywood to Bollywood with conductor Robert Zeigler and the BBC Concert Orchestra for Radio 2s Friday Night is Music Night.
The show was broadcast twice in 2010.
Haveli Sangeet is a semi classical form of Hindustani classical music sung in Havelis.
The essential component is dhrupad.
It originated in Uttar Pradesh in North India.
It is the daily worship of Lord Krishna.
Although a mix of classical and folk music, the style is inherently borrowed from the dhrupad and Dhamar.
Hangal belonged to the Kirana gharana.
Gangubai Hangal was born in Dharwad to Chikkurao Nadiger, an agriculturist and Ambabai, a vocalist of Carnatic music.
Hangal received only elementary education and her family shifted to Hubli in 1928 so that Gangubai could study Hindustani music.
She began to train formally aged 13 with Krishnacharya Hulgur, a kinnari player, studying Hindustani classical music.
From Hulgur, Gangubai learned sixty compositions in one year before he stopped teaching her after an argument about his fees.
She also learned from Dattopant Desai before studying under Sawai Gandharva, a respected guru.
She performed all over India and for All India Radio stations until 1945.
Hangal had initially performed light classical genres, including bhajan and thumri, but concentrated on khyal.
Later, however, she refused to sing light classical, saying she sang only ragas.
Hangal served as honorary music professor of the Karnatak University.
She gave her last concert in March 2006 to mark her 75th career year.
She had her eyes donated to increase awareness for organ donation.
Hangal married at age 16 to Gururao Kaulgi, a Brahmin lawyer.
They had two sons, Narayan Rao and Babu Rao, and one daughter, Krishna, who died from cancer in 2004, aged 75.
Awards and honors.
Gangubai Hangal received a number of awards, which include :.
The Karnataka state government declared two days of mourning for Hangal.
A state funeral was announced for 22 July in Hubli by the district commissioner of the Dharwad district.
In 2008, The State Government of Karnataka decided to name the proposed Karnataka State Music University after Gangubhai Hangal.
Subsequently Karnataka State Dr Gangubai Hangal Music and Performing Arts University Act, 2009 has been passed by the State Legislature.
Presently the Karnataka State Gangubhai Hangal Music and Performing Arts University operates from Mysore, Karnataka.
Madhav Gudi was a Hindustani classical vocalist, specialising in Khayal and light forms.
Early life and background.
Madhav Gudi was born in Dharwad, Karnataka into a family of keertankars and harikatha musicians.
Madhav Gudi was introduced to music at a very early age.
Gudis voice suited for Hindustani classical as well as light classical music.
A top-grade All India Radio artiste, he toured all over India and performed with Pt.
Bhimsen Joshi in several centers in India and overseas.
Dr. Pantula Rama is a Carnatic Music vocalist.
Early life and background.
Pantula Rama was born into a family with a lineage of music.
Her parents are Pantula Gopala Rao and Pantula Padmavathi a veena artiste.
She holds a Ph.D.
Her initial training was given to her by her father, and advanced training under Sangeeta Kalasagara Ivaturi Vijayeswara Rao.
She is a Reiki Master in the Natural Usui system of healing.
Pantula Rama has been performing since she was eight.
Her technical perfection conforms to the best classical standards.
She has performed across the country and abroad.
Conducted ` Nowkacharitam ' - Musical Opera of Thyagaraja.
A multitalented personality, Dr. Pantula Rama accompanies many artists of repute on violin.
Harihar Rao was a noted Hindustani musician, accomplished playing both tabla and sitar.
He was born into a prominent musical family in Mangalore, India, on January 21, 1927.
He moved to the United States in 1964, residing in Pasadena, CA, and became a U.S. citizen in 1969.
He worked in the ethnomusicology department at UCLA and privately taught and mentored students of the sitar.
-LSB- 2 and ultimately thousands of copies in four printings.
Rao died January 13, 2013, at the age of 85.
Rao was the longest-standing protege and a close friend for more than six decades of internationally famous sitar player Ravi Shankar.
He served as the Artistic Director of the Music Circle for 40 years.
He accompanied Shankar on many concert tours in North America and around the world.
Rao and Shankar co-founded the Music Circle, an organization dedicated to promoting Indian classical music.
Music Circle concerts soon attained legendary status among devotees of Indian music around the world.
Since its founding, Music Circle has hosted hundreds of Indian Music concerts.
After devastating typhoon damage to Bangladesh in April 1971, Beatles musician George Harrison proposed a benefit concert to Shankar.
In 1965 Rao and Ellis co-wrote An Introduction to Indian Music for the Jazz Musician, which was printed by Jazz Magazine.
^ Rao, Harihar.
Introduction to sitar.
^ Peer-Southern Publication on Sitar Is a Fast Mover.
Billboard 79 : 6.
April 15, 1967.
Retrieved Aug 11 2011.
^ Peer Southern Increases Indian Music Collection.
Billboard 81 : 44.
April 12, 1969.
Retrieved Aug 11 2011.
^ About the Music Circle.
The Music Circle.
Retrieved Aug 11 2011.
^ Rao, Harihar ; Don Ellis.
An Introduction to Indian Music for the Jazz Musician.
^ Fenlon, Sean.
The Exotic Rhythms of Don Ellis.
Baltimore, MD : The Peabody Institute of the Johns Hopkins University.
Indias Master Musician.
Indias Master Musician is an album by Hindustani classical musician Ravi Shankar.
It was recorded in Hollywood, California in 1963 and released that same year on vinyl.
It was later digitally remastered and released in CD format through Angel Records, with digital remastering by Squires Productions.
Supporting musicians are Chatur Lal on tabla and Nodu Mullick on Tamboura.
Shubhendra Shankar  30 March 1942 - 15 September 1992.
also known as Shubho Shankar was a graphic artist, musician and composer.
He was the son of the world-famous Ravi Shankar, and, possibly more famous in India, Annapurna Devi.
Shubho was the son of sitar virtuoso Ravi Shankar and surbahar player of the Maihar Gharana, Annapurna Devi.
He was the grandson of Ustad Allauddin Khan, and the half-brother of Ravi Shankars daughters Anoushka Shankar and Norah Jones.
The performance was titled Fathers and Sons and included tabla players Alla Rakha and his son Zakir Hussain.
Shankar performed frequently on concert tours, composed music for films and recorded several albums.
After marrying, he gradually dropped out of the music scene and stopped playing the sitar for almost eight years.
At the age of 40, he took his fathers advice to return to his music full-time.
He gave lessons in sitar playing, singing and flute in Orange County, San Diego and Los Angeles.
In 1989-1990, he went on a concert tour of England, Europe and India.
He resumed learning the sitar under his mother.
Shankar was dejected, and refused to stay back to complete his sitar education, saying it was too late now.
He returned to the US, and in his last few months cut himself off from everyone.
At a concert he gave at Whittier College, Shubho met Linda, from North Carolina, soon to be his wife.
They had two children, son Somnath and daughter Kaveri.
Gradually he lost interest in playing the sitar.
Shankar died of pneumonia at Los Alamitos Medical Center following an illness of several months at his home in Garden Grove.
He was cremated and the remains dispersed in the ocean off Marina del Rey.
Girish Panchwadkar is an accomplished Marathi singer and music director from India.
He is a well known singer in Marathi Light music.
He has learnt music from his father Bhalchandra Panchwadkar.
He formed a music group Kshitij a group of marathi songs.
He started his performance through the program Shabdswaranche Indradhanushya in Solapur in 1992.
He is performing on stage since last 21 years in Maharashtra and outside.
He has also performed in All India Radio, Solapur many times.
Kshitij is the 1st group in Maharashtra to perform Marathi Songs in Rashtrapati Bhavan.
Kshitij group performed over 800 programs all over India till date.
In the year 2009, Hon.Union Power Minister Sushilkumar Shinde had invited him to perform at his Delhi residence.
The program was appreciated by Hon.Chief Minister of Delhi Sheila Dikshit, Governor of Rajasthan Prabha Rau.
He specially sing the songs of Sudhir Phadke, Suresh Wadkar, Arun Date etc.
List of Awards.
A list of awards received by him.
Girish is working in Bank of Maharashtra since July 1982 and is devoted his life in Marathi music.
He has two kids Akshay Panchwadkar and Aaditi Panchwadkar who also perform Marathi Music programs with him.
He is famous for his classic handwriting and special signature.
Sawani is a genre of semi-classical singing, popular in Uttar Pradesh and Bihar.
Pandit Sudhir is an Indian sitar player of Hindustani classical music.
He is known for the vocalistic phrasing of his raga improvisations.
He has learnt sitar from the Imdadkhani Gharana, popularly known as the Etawah Gharana.
He is the son of Sampat Lal, a tabla player of Central India.
His grandfather, Badri Prasad, was the court musician of the former principality of Raigarh, situated in the modern state of Chattisgarh.
At the age of 14 he started talim in the traditional way under the guidance of Bimalendu Mukherjee as his Guru.
Performing career and achievements.
He is Gold medalist Sangeet Visharad from Gandharva Mahamandal.
He also received national titles at Khel Yuva Utsav at Pune and Jamshedpur.
He has performed at many major musical festivals and prestigious stages in Chhattisgarh and Maharashtra.
He has also performed at the prestigious Chakradhar Samaroh at Raighar in the year 2011.
Shafaat Ahmed Khan.
Ustad Shafaat Ahmed Khan, was a noted tabla master.
Khan, who hailed from the Delhi Gharana, was the son of tabla master Shamma Khan.
He was a recipient of Padma Shree award in 2004.
Khan had played with top classical artistes like Pt.
Ravi Shankar, Pt.
Shiv Kumar Sharma, Ustd.
Amjad Khan, Pt.Bhimsen Joshi, Pt.Jasraj and Pt.Hari Prasad Chaurasia, besides himself as solo artist.
Khan was popular among artistes because of humble nature and down to earth attitude.
Khan died in 2005 after being diagnosed with acute Hepatitis-B.
Al Gromer Khan.
He spent his early years in Frauenzell and deserted from German Military Service to England, Morocco and India.
His father worked in Frauenzell as Bus Motor Carrier.
Gromer Khan claims to have rejected the academic or diplomatic careers his parents expected him to take up.
Development as a sitarist.
He remained in India, where he was to find a powerful teacher in Vilayat Khans brother, Ustad Imrat Khan.
Gromer Khan remained in India for the next three years, speed-learning his instrument at the feet of his guru.
He returned to Bavaria in 1971, already an accomplished sitarist.
Gromer Khan spent the next 10 years studying with Imrat Khan in Europe and India.
In 1975, his teacher performed the Ghanda Ceremony, thus initiating Al Gromer into the Khan-I-Gharana lineage of sitarists.
After his initiation, Al Gromer added Khan to his name.
Since 1974, Khan has released nearly 40 albums.
He currently resides in Munich, Germany.
In 2009 the novel Jimi of Silence was released.
Pandit Pran Nath was a Hindustani classical singer and teacher of the Kirana Gharana.
Pran Nath was born into a wealthy family in Lahore in present-day Pakistan.
In 1937, he became a staff artist with All India Radio.
Nath supported himself as a music teacher, and worked at the University of Delhi from 1960 to 1970.
He was also a visiting professor of music at Mills College.
Life in the United States.
He taught at several universities and attracted a strong following among the American minimalist composers.
Like his teacher, Abdul Wahid Khan, Pran Nath did not emphasize recording or the releasing of records, preferring live performance.
As such, little recorded documentation of the Kirana Gharana style is available.
In Pran Naths will Young, as executor of his estate, was instructed to begin releasing recordings.
Pandit Hariprasad Chaurasia is an Indian classical flautist.
Hariprasad Chaurasia was born in Allahabad in the Indian state of Uttar Pradesh.
His father was a wrestler.
His mother died when he was 6.
He had to learn music without his fathers knowledge, for his father wanted him to become a wrestler.
Hariprasad Chaurasia started learning vocal music from his neighbor, Pandit Rajaram, at the age of 15.
Later, he switched to playing the flute under the tutelage of Pandit Bholanath Prasanna of Varanasi for eight years.
He joined the All India Radio, Cuttack, Odisha in 1957 and worked as a composer and performer.
Much later, while working for All India Radio, he received guidance from the reclusive Annapurna Devi, daughter of Baba Allaudin Khan.
He has collaborated with world musicians in experimental cross-cultural performances, including the fusion group Shakti.
He serves as the artistic director of the World Music Department at the Rotterdam Music Conservatory in the Netherlands.
He is also the founder of the Vrindavan Gurukul in Mumbai and Vrindavan Gurukul in Bhubaneshwar.
Both of these institutes are schools dedicated to training students in Hindustani Bansuri in the Guru-shishya tradition.
As a Guru, he has produced many noted disciples including his nephew Rakesh Chaurasia.
He has performed throughout the world, winning acclaim from varied audiences and fellow musicians including Yehudi Menuhin and Jean-Pierre Rampal.
Chaurasia was married to Kamla and Anuradha.
He has three sons Vinay, Ajay and Rajiv.
In popular culture.
These are major albums released by Pandit Hariprasad Chaurasia, categorized by release dates .2.
Music for Bollywood films.
Along with Pandit Shivkumar Sharma he composed music for.
Music for Telugu films.
Music for English films.
Some of his music is used in Mithaq Kazimi s 16 Days in Afghanistan.
T. V. Gopalakrishnan.
Tirupanithurai Viswanatha Gopalakrishnan is a Carnatic and Hindustani musician from Chennai.
Gopalakrishnan hails from a family of musicians spanning over two centuries.
He is a vocalist, plays the violin and is also an exponent of the mridangam.
He is a disciple of Chembai Vaidyanatha Bhagavathar.
His students include Ilayaraja, A.R.Rahman, Sivamani, Kadri Gopalnath, Vidyabhushana.
He has also collaborated with drummer/composer Franklin Kiermyer on live performances.
Gopalakrishnan was given the Sangeet Natak Akademi Award in 1990.
He has been awarded the Padma Bhushan by the Government of India in the year 2012.
Ghatam Maestro Late T V Vasan is his younger brother.
In his career spanning over five decades, many honours and awards that have been bestowed on Dr.TVG.
A few outstanding awards have been :.
This is an incomplete list of releases.
The release dates are also not always indicative of the original release date of the associated record.
Vadi, in both Hindustani classical music and Carnatic music, is the dominant swara of a given raga.
Vadi is the most sonant or most important note of a Raga.
It does not refer to the most played note but it rather refers to a note of special significance.
Vadi swara in a raga is like a king in a kingdom.
Vadi swara is also helpful to identify the time of singing or playing a raga.
Abhijit Pohankar is an Indian classical instrumentalist.
He plays classical music on the keyboard.
Abhijit was born to Ajay Pohankar.
He is the grandson of Susheela Pohankar of Kirana Gharana.
He learned for some time with Shivkumar Sharma.
Abhijit was the first artist to play Indian classical ragas on the keyboard.
After playing classical music on a keyboard, he started venturing into world music and fusion music.
He is one of the most successful fusion music producers.
His latex project/band is called Panch Tatva.
He has also composed the title track of the 2003 film Boom, by Kaizad Gusted and starring Amitabh Bachchan and Bo-Derek.
Lenny Seidman is a tabla musician/composer and World Music and Jazz curator at the Painted Bride Art Center in Philadelphia.
Seldman studied tabla in 1971 with Ishwarlal Misra, followed by Chotelal Misra and Kiran Deshponde, all from Benares, India.
Previously he was a student of classical and jazz piano.
He also performed with South Indian violinist Adrian L'Armand.
Around the same, time he toured with Bansuri flutist Paul John for lasted several years.
He has founded and coordinated several other ensembles including the Shamanistics and Splinter Group.
Grants and commissions.
Lenny has received two Pennsylvania Council on the Arts Fellowships and an Independence Foundation Fellowship for creative work.
He also was awarded a three month residency at Headlands Center for the Arts in Sausalito, CA.
Rain Man of Fitz.
Mercy in honor of his brother, Murray, who was murdered in early 2011.
This piece was performed by Spoken Hand Percussion Orchestra in May, 2011.
Taal of the Wild  ... Commissioned by the Independence Foundation.
Taal refers to the rhythmic system in Indian music ; of the Wild from Jack London s Call of the Wild.
Bendir, Done Dat - Composed for Spoken Hand Percussion Orchestra.
Features a trio of Bendir players.
It is now part of Spoken Hands repertory.
Peshkar - Composed for Spoken Hand.
Peshkar is one of the primary compositional forms in the classical tabla repertoire.
It is now in the Spoken Hand repertory.
Mudra Hang  ... Commissioned by choreographer Kim Arrow for his multimedia work, Quasimodo in the Outback.
Composed for the tabla choir, this suite collaborates with both live and animated dance.
Dha Funk is part of Spoken Hands repertory.
Skinful was also performed by the APPEX Percussion Ensemble at UCLA.
Haitian Taiko ... Composed for tabla and Swarthmore College s Taiko Ensemble.
The primary rhythmic theme was inspired by an Afro/Haitian rhythm, developed for the tabla choir.
Batu-Batu Tukene ... Composed for tabla and Swarthmore College s Balinese Gamelan ensemble, Semara Santi.
This piece merges both traditions in a contemporary format, set to a 6 beat cycle in a main subdivision of 9-7-5-3.
Tabula Rasa ... Commissioned by Phrenic New Ballet.
This piece was composed for choreographer, Christine Cox.
It is a recording studio suite consisting of multi track tabla layers of various pitches with an abstract electronic music section.
MC Yogi is the stage name of Nicholas Giacomini, an American hip hop musician and yogi.
His music style characteristically contains themes promoting Hindu philosophy and many of his songs are bhajans.
Yoga Journal reviewed MC Yogis work as surprisingly educational because he makes rapping about Hindu deities little learning opportunities.
The New York Times said that MC Yogi may embody the ethos of the Wanderlust Festival more than any other performer.
In 2009 Starbucks promoted an MC Yogi song as part of a campaign called Are You In ?.
The purpose of the campaign is to promote community service and volunteering.
In 2012, MC Yogi produced a video in celebration of Gandhi Jayanti.
The video is called, Be the Change.
Bahar is a Hindustani classical raga.
Writing about the musical theory of Indian classical music is fraught with complications.
First of all, there have been no set, formal methods of written notation.
Indian music is an aural tradition, and therefore writing is not an essential part of attaining talim.
Arohana & Avarohana.
ni Sa ga ma Pa, ga ma Dha ni Sa.
Sa ni Pa ma Pa ga ma Re Sa.
Vadi & Samavadi.
Jati : Shadav - Sampurna.
Thaat : Kafi That.
Pakad or Chalan.
Related ragas : Shahana Kanada, Shahana Bahar, Basant Bahar, Adana Bahar.
Thaat : Kafi.
Behavior refers to practical aspects of the music.
It is complicated to talk about this for Hindustani music since many of the concepts are fluid, changing, or archaic.
The following information can not be accurate, but it can attempt to reflect how the music existed.
Certain ragas have seasonal associations.
Raag Bahar is usually rendered in the Spring season.
since it is the raga of spring, it can be considered that the raga has shringara rasa.
Rao, Suvarnalata ; der Meer, Wim van ; Harvey, Jane The Raga Guide : A Survey of 74 Hindustani Ragas.
Zenith Media, London : 1999.
Nagaraja Rao Havaldar.
Dr. Nagaraja Rao Havaldar is a Hindustani Classical vocalist from Karnataka, India.
Dr. Havaldar is a disciple Pandit Madhava Gudi, himself a prime disciple of the Kirana scion Pandit Bhimsen Joshi.
He is also a disciple of Pandit Panchakshari Swami Mattigatti, a senior disciple of Pandit Mallikarjun Mansur, of the Jaipur-Atrauli Gharana.
He holds with distinction, Sangeetha Ratna, a degree in Hindustani Classical Music from Karnataka University, Dharawada.
He has also toured the United States and the United Kingdom extensively.
Besides live performances, Dr Havaldar has cut numerous albums in the Khayal and lighter genres.
He is the founder and president of Sunaada Art Foundation, an organization dedicated to the promotion of Indian classical Music.
He has also worked with a theatre group in Indianapolis on the music of a play with a spiritual theme.
Many of his students have become prominent musicians themselves, notably his son Omkarnath Havaldar and Kannada playback singer Chaitra HG.
Dr Havaldar has previously worked as a Programme Executive at the Music Archives, All India Radio, Hubli.
He was also formerly the chairman of Textbook Committee for Hindustani Music, for The Directorate of Textbooks, Karnataka.
Dr Havaldar was born in Hosapete town in Bellary District, Karnataka, where he spent his early years until his graduation.
He currently resides in Bengaluru.
His sons Omkarnath and Kedarnath are upcoming musicians - Omkarnath is a vocalist while Kedarnath is a tabaliya.
Anita Singhvi is an Indian classical singer.
She is an exponent of sufi music.
Anita Singhvi was born into a business family in Jodhpur, Rajasthan.
She has a B.A. and LLB.
Anita Singhvi made her debut with Naqsh-e-Noor album.
She has performed a number of concerts both in India and abroad.
Anita Singhvi got married to noted lawyer and Congress party spokesperson, Abhishek Singhvi.
They have two sons.
Early life and training.
Later at the age of 19 he moved to Mumbai, where he learnt under Pandit Pannalal Ghosh of Maihar gharana.
Pandit Raghunath Seth is a famous Music Director too.
He has made many breakthroughs in the technique of flute making and playing.
Chaiti are a semi-classical songs sung in the Hindu calendar month of Chait.
These songs are rendered during the Holy month of Sri Rama Navami in March/April.
It falls under light classical form of Hindustani classical music.
The songs typically has the name of Lord Rama.
Some of the popular singers of Chaiti are Girija Devi etc.
Smita Bellur is a renowned Hindustani classical vocalist and Sufi singer.
She belongs to Jaipur - Kirana gharana.
Life and career.
Smita Bellur hails from North Karnataka.
She is the third child of Late Shri.
K.L Subba Rao and Late Smt.
K.S. Susheela Rao.
Khayal Gayaki training in Guru Shishya Parampara.
Smita Bellur has trained in Hindustani Khayal gayaki under gurus late Shri.
P. R. Bhagwat, ` Sangeet Ratna ' Late Pt.
Arjunsa Nakod, a doyen of the Gwalior - Kirana Gharana, Late Pt.
Rajabhau Sontakke and Pt.
She is currently getting ` taleem ' from ` Gaan Saraswati ', ` Sangeet Kaumudi ' Vidushi Dr. Alka Deo Marulkar.
Smita has travelled extensively for concert tours and is a graded artiste of Indias national Radio network called All India Radio.
Her concerts are regularly broadcast on TV channels.
She also runs ` people for Raaga ' and ` Anhad Naad Sufi Sangeet '.
She is an MS and BE by qualification and also freelances as a music journalist.
She plays music for the soul  - The New Indian Express, Oct 2012.
Recitals and concerts.
Smita is a regular B High artiste of All India Radio, Dharwad.
Propagation and promotion of Indian classical music.
Anhad Naad Sufi Sangeet - is a forum for Sufi philosophy and music.
Expression through writing.
Smita freelances as a journalist writing on classical artforms, especially music.
More than 50 of her articles have been published and appreciated too.
Music for a cause.
Music for communal harmony and national integration.
Music has no borders of religion, caste, race or language.
Presented at several fora like corporate events, Indian Institute of World Culture ; televised and broadcast by news channel TV9.
Daasa-Soofi-Sharanara Anubhaava Lahari.
Exploring the common threads of Dasa, Soofi and Shivasharana philosophies with multi-lingual music that celebrates unity in diversity.
The music is accompanied by an explanatory lecture by Dr. Yejazuddin Ashrafi.
Presented in Gokhale Institute of Public Affairs etc. ,.
Madhav Gudi was a Hindustani classical vocalist, specializing in Khayal and light forms.
Early life and background.
Madhav Gudi was born in Dharwad, Karnataka into a family of keertankars and harikatha musicians.
Madhav Gudi was introduced to music at a very early age.
Gudis voice suited for Hindustani classical as well as light classical music.
A top-grade All India Radio artiste, he toured all over India and performed with Pt.
Bhimsen Joshi in several centers in India and overseas.
Ajay Pohankar is an Indian classical vocalist.
Early life and background.
Ajay Pohankar was born in Jabalpur, Madhya Pradesh, where his father was an advocate.
He had his initial tutelage under his mother Sushilabai Pohankar, a classical vocalist and a musicologist of Kirana gharana.
His sister, Swati Natekar is also a singer based in London.
Ajay Pohankar is quite popular for his classical concerts.
He is known for the musical video, Piya Bawari.
He also interacted with legendary vocalist, Ustad Amir Khan, who used to frequent his house when he was young.
Ajay Pohankar is married to Anjali Pohankar, a vocalist and musicologist.
They have a son, Abhijit Pohankar, a classical instrumentalist.
Awards and honours.
She is a Madhva Brahmin and holds a Bachelor of Engineering alongside being skilled at Gymnastics and Fencing.
V. Manohar, which marked the beginning of Chaitras career as a playback singer.
As A Singer.
2012 - Kilikal Parannatho.
2012 - Parvathy Pura.
2011 - Banna bannada loka.
2006 - Amrutha dare.
He was awarded the Padma Bhushan, Indias third highest civilian honor, on 25 January 2010.
Mishra was born on 3 August 1936 in Hariharpur, Azamgarh district of Uttar Pradesh, in the home of Badri Prasad Mishra.
His grandfather,  Gudai Maharaj  Shanta Prasad, was a noted tabla player.
He was trained thereafter by Thakur Jaidev Singh.
His son, Ramkumar Mishra is one of the finest exponents of tabla in India today.
Abhogi is a raga in Carnatic music and has been adapted to Hindustani music.
It is a pentatonic scale, an audava or owdava raga.
It is a derived scale, as it does not have all the seven swaras.
Abhogi has been borrowed from Carnatic music into Hindustani music and is also quite popular in the latter.
Structure and Lakshana.
Abhogi is a symmetric pentatonic scale that does not contain panchamam and nishadam.
It is called an audava-audava raga, in Carnatic classification, as it has 5 notes in both ascending and descending scales.
Its structure is as follows :.
The notes used are shadjam, chathusruti rishabham, sadharana gandharam, shuddha madhyamam and chathusruthi dhaivatham.
Abhogi is a scale that is used for compositions in a medium to fast tempo.
This scale has been used by many composers and there are lots of compositions in classical music.
It has been used to score film music too.
Here are some popular compositions in Abhogi.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this raga.
Abhogis notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields another pentatonic ragam Valaji.
For more details and illustration of this concept refer Graha bhedam on Abhogi.
P.Moutal understands raag Kalavati as transposition of Abhogi.
List of compositions in Abhogi.
There are also some Tamil movie songs based on the raga of abhogi.
Songs in abhogi raga gives extreme pleasure to ears.
Two Tamil songs are cited below for the reference.
In Hindustani music.
Pakad or Chalan.
GMDS SDRSDMD _ D_SRGRS D_RSDM GMMDDSDRSD_M GMD_MGGRR _ GRSd Rd_S.
Organization & Relationships.
Pa and Ni are omitted.
Also Re is often omitted in ascent.
Flat Ga is often approached from Ma in ascent and has a slight oscillation to show the typical Kanada.
In descent often the typical Kanada phrase gMRS is used.
Related ragas : Bageshree.
However, Bageshree also includes flat Ni and a limited use of Pa, which gives a different flavour.
Thaat : Kafi.
Night, approximately 9PM-12AM.
List of Film Songs based on Ragas.
Rao, Suvarnalata ; der Meer, Wim van ; Harvey, Jane The Raga Guide : A Survey of 74 Hindustani Ragas.
Zenith Media, London : 1999.
Tintal is one of the most famous talas of Hindustani music.
It is also the most common tal in North India.
Tintal has sixteen beats in four equal divisions.
The period between every two beats is equal.
The first beat out of 16 beats is called sam and the 9th beat is called khali.
Cyclical series of equally periodical beats consisted of recurring claps and waves :.
clap, 2, 3, 4, clap, 2, 3, 4, wave, 2, 3, 4, clap, 2, 3, 4.
or counted out as :.
clap, 2, 3, 4, clap, 6, 7, 8, wave, 10, 11, 12, clap 14, 15, 16.
Teen Taal can be used for both accompaniment and solo.There are various Kaidas and Parans for it.
It has a characteristic pattern of bols.
This can also be shown using the following figure.
Arun Dravid is a Hindustani Classical Music singer of the Jaipur-Atrauli Gharana tradition.
He is also a technocrat with a high profile professional career.
Early life and background.
He has had an engineering career with numerous awards and distinctions.
Arun Dravid has cultivated a balanced version of the  Bhava-dominant  style of Smt.
Kishori Amonkar and the structural beauty that is the characteristic of the puritanical Jaipur-Atrauli Gharana gayaki.
He is now recognized as an outstanding exponent of Jaipur-Atrauli gayaki in India and abroad.
In her recent biography titled Ganasaraswati, Smt.
Arun also sings with equal charm light-classical varieties such as Thumris and Natya-Sangeet.
The text is also known as Saptadhyayi as it is divided into seven chapters.
The significant commentaries on the text include the Sangitasudhakara of Simhabhupala and the Kalanidhi of Kallinatha.
This work was written by Sarngadeva in the end of thirteenth century.
The author was attached to the court of Yadava King Singhana, whose capital was Devagiri.
As the title indicates the work deals with the subject of Sangita.
Sangita is defined as a composite art consisting of Gita, Vadya and Nrtta.
Sangita is of two kinds.
Marga-sangita and Desi-sangita.
Marga-sangita is nothing but the Natya performed by Bharata and his disciples.
This performance of Bharata also consists of Gita, Vadya and Nrtta.
Desi-sangita represented a tradition different from Marga and it varied from region to region.
Sarngadevas aim in this work is to describe primarily the Desi-sangita.
The aspects of Marga-sangita are also described to some extent.
The work is divided into seven chapters covering the aspects Gita, Vadya and Nrtta.
The seven chapters are :.
Chapter 1 : Svaragatadhyaya.
The Svaragatadhyaya is further divided into eight prakarana-s or sections.
The author commences with an account of his genealogy i.e., about his family and the Kingdom where they lived.
The author also declares that among the three constituents of Sangita, Gita is primary and the most important.
Hence the treatment of Gita is taken up by him first.
Some of them are Bharata, Kasyapa, Matanga, Kohala, Visakhila, Dattila, Abhinavagupta, Somesvara.
This section describes the genesis of the human body from its conception to its growth.
The physiological account of the human body is given next according to the Ayurveda system.
This is followed by the indication of chakra-s, energy centres, based on the yogic school.
By concentrating on some of these cakra-s one could attain great heights in music.
In each Sthana because of the presence of twenty-two Nadi-s, twenty-two Sruti - s are produced.
Sruti-s are units of tonal interval with which the interval of a Svara is measured.
Hence the Svara-s are described next.
After describing the intervals of the Suddha-svara-s those of the Vikrta-svara-s are given.
Suddha-svara-s conform to the arrangements of the seven svara-s of the Sadja-murcchana of Sadjagrama.
The Vikrta-svara-s differ from this arrangement.
There are seven Suddha and twelve Vikrta-svara-s, as shown in the table.
The four kinds of roles that svaras play in a melodic structure, namely, Vadi, Samvadi, Vivadi and Anuvadi are described next.
Finally the association of Svara-s with different Castes, Colours, Islands, Seers, Chanda, Aesthetic tastes are given.
Grama, Murcchana, Krama and Tana.
This prakarana deals with Grama, Murcchana, Krama and Tana.
Three Gramas are described - Sadja-grama, Madhyama-grama and Gandhara-grama.
The names of the Seven Murcchana-s in each Grama are also given.
Among the tanas there are two kinds - Suddha and Kuta.
Suddha-tana is a Murcchana devoid of one or two svara-s.
Sadharana is of two kinds Svara-sadharana Jati-sadharana.
Sadharana means being common to two or more elements.
When an extra svara occurs within the region between two svara-s then it is called sadharana svara.
Such svara-s are seen to occur in the region between Gandhara and Madhyama and between Nisada and Sadja.
The sixth prakarana is on Varna and Alankara.
Varna-s denote the different kinds of movements that a melodic line can take.
There are four varnas -- Sthayi, Arohi, Avarohi and Sancari.
Alankara-s are ornamental patterns of svara-s that decorate a melodic line.
Alankara-s are classified under the four Varna-s.
In addition seven more Alankara are given.
The seventh prakarana is Jati-prakarana in which the laksana-s or characteristics of eighteen Jati-s are given.
These eighteen Jati-s are :.
The characteristics or the laksana-s that are used for a describing a Jati are the same ten as mentioned in Brhaddesi.
i  Graha : the svara commencing the melody.
ii  Amsa : the predominant svara that formed the tonic and also frequently occurred in the melody.
iii  Tara : the svara in the higher register up to which the melodic movement could.
iv  Mandra : the svara in the lower register up to which the melodic movement could descend.
v  Nyasa : the svara on which a song finally concludes.
vi  Apanyasa : the svara on which the section of the song can conclude.
vii  Alpatva : the svara, which should be sparingly used or rendered weak.
viii  Bahutva : svara, which is strong and frequently used.
ix  Sadava : the svara, which could be omitted to render the jati in six notes.
x  Auduva : those two svara-s, which could be dropped to render the jati in five svara-s.
In addition three more are given.
These are :.
A song for each of the eighteen Jati-s is given.
The last prakarana is called the Giti-prakarana.
In the second part of this prakarana, the Giti-s are described.
Giti is a kind of variation brought about through changes in the duration of certain element of a song.
There are two kinds of Giti.
Tala-giti : This relates to the change in the duration the Kriya-s or actions of a tala.
Chapter 2 : Raga-viveka-adhyaya.
The second chapter describes the Raga - s.
The Raga-s are divided into Marga and Desi.
Gramaragas resemble the Jati-s closely and they are further classified on the basis of the different melodic styles characterising them.
These styles are called Giti and are of five kinds -- Suddha, Bhinna, Gaudi, Sadharani and Vesara.
In all, there are thirty-three Gramaraga-s.
Uparaga-s and Raga-s are closer to Gramaraga-s.
Bhasa-s, Vibhasa-s and Antarabhasa-s are derivatives of Gramaraga-s and Uparaga-s and represent different tunes of the parent Raga.
Ragangaraga-s are derivatives of Gramaraga-s and Bhasanga-s are derivatives of Bhasa-s.
Kriyanga-s are certain melodic themes employed in dramatic performances portraying different kinds of emotions.
In this chapter Sarngadeva deals primarily with the Desiraga-s.
In addition he describes the parent Bhasa and the source Gramaraga-s.
Under each Gramaraga he gives in notation a song called Aksiptika based on that Raga.
Chapter 3 : Prakirnaka-adhyaya.
The third chapter deals with a variety of topics.
They are -- a  The characteristics Vaggeyakara-s.
Vaggeyakara-s are composers of both the melody and text of a song.
d  Sthaya : There are ninety-six kinds of Sthaya-s, which represent the feelings or effects associated with raga phrases.
e  Alapti. : There are two kinds of Alapti.
Chapter 4 : Prabandha-adhyaya.
Prabandha represents a collection of musical forms described in terms of two aspects, namely, Dhatu and Anga.
Dhatu denotes the different sections, which are, at a maximum, five :.
Anga-s are six : and denote the content of a song.
These cover the three aspects of Music - Melody, Tala and the text.
Prabandha-s are divided into three classes :.
Suda prabandha-s are further divided into two groups.
Chapter 5 : Tala-adhyaya.
This chapter could be divided into 2 sections, one dealing with Marga tala-s the other with Desi talas.
The Margatala-s are 5 :.
In this section is also included the description of musical forms called ` Gitaka-s.
Gitaka-s musical forms are set in a temporal framework defined in terms of the margatala structures.
After these the Desitala-s used in the prabandhas, which total around 120, are described.
Chapter 6 : Vadya-adhyaya.
In the sixth chapter come the four classes of musical instruments.
i  Tata - Stretched stringed instruments.
ii  Susira - Literally those with holes, i.e., the wind instruments.
iii  Avanaddha - Literally covered i.e., drums constructed as vessels covered by stretched membranes.
iv  Ghana - Literally dense objects i.e., solid pieces like Bell, Cymbals etc.
For these Vadya-s not only the construction but also the technique of playing and the compositions played on them are described.
Some of the instruments under the four categories are :.
a  Tata - Ekatantri, Citra, Vipanci, Mattakokila, Alapini, Kinnari.
b  Susira - Vamsa, Kahala, Sankha.
c  Avanaddha - Hudukka, Pataha.
d  Ghana - Kamsyatala, Ghanta.
Chapter 7 : Nartana-adhyaya.
The seventh and the last chapter is in two parts.
The first one deals with Nartana.
However only the aspects of Nrtta is relevant to Sangita.
The different kinds of performance of sangita involving the three aspects of Gita, Vadya and Nrtta are described.
Some of these are - Suddha-paddhati and Gaundali-vidhi.
Patronage in the Devagiri Court.
Bhaskaracharya, the outstanding mathematician and astronomer produced his Siddhanta-Siromani, an exposition on algebra, shortly before Yadava independence.
His son Lakshmidhara was an astrologer in Jaitugus court and his grandson, Changadeva, held the same position during Singhanas time.
In 1207, Singhana established school for the study of the works of Bhaskaracharya.
The aforementioned Changadeva was head of the school.
Anantadeva, Changadevas cousin, was also a great astronomer in Singhanas court.
Jnanadeva wrote his Jnanesvari, an important piece of early Marathi literature, under the rule of the later Yadava Kings.
Clearly, the Devagiri court was an accommodating environment for scholarly endeavors.
Sangitaratnakara is a very important text and this is evident from the fact that many commentaries were written on it.
The famous ones are Sangitasudhakara of Simbabhupala and Kalanidhi of Kallinatha.
On the other hand the work made a great impact on almost all the writers in the subsequent period.
Thus it forms a useful bridge between the ancient and the medieval periods.
Sarngadeva called himself Nih, sanka i.e., ` doubtless.
He also names a stringed instrument as Nih,sanka-Vina and Desi-tala as Nih,sanka-tala.
This book is a great landmark in the history of Indian Music.
The Living Room Sessions Part 1.
The album earned Shankar the Grammy Award for Best World Music Album.
Nirmala Devi, also known as Nirmala Arun, was a Punjabi Hindustani classical vocalist of the Patiala Gharana, in far northern India.
She is the mother of Bollywood actor Govinda.
Nirmala Devi was the wife of a popular actor, of the 1940s, Arun Ahuja.
She has five children, including actor Govinda and director Kirti Kumar.
She died in 1996.
Pandit Ratnakar Pai was a Hindustani classical music vocalist of the Jaipur-Atrauli Gharana.
Pai received musical training from two erudite teachers, Mohanrao Palekar and Utd.
Alladiya Khan and from the foremost, non-blood-related disciples of the Ustad.
Pai was instrumental in clarifying the differences and enhancing the wholesomeness of the Gharanas ideology.
Pais primary focus was teaching, where his many successful students are evidence of his musical stature.
Interpretation of the Jaipur-Atrauli Gayaki.
Pai died on the evening of August 9, 2009.
He was not keeping good health and underwent an operation for gangrene several months prior.
Pai has taught many successful musicians, including Jitendra Abhisheki, Bhalchandra G. Tilak, Dr. Milind Malshe, Mrs. Shalmalee Joshi, and Smt.
It was invented by Amir Khusro, and is similar to the Qalbana form of Sufi poetry.
The structure consists of a main melody, usually short, repeated many times, with variation and elaboration at the performers discretion.
There is a second, contrasting melody, usually with higher notes, which is introduced once before returning to the main melody.
In the words of Thakur Jaidev Singh, an influential commentator on Indian music :.
The thillana from Carnatic music is based on the tarana, according to Balasaraswati, and is widely used in dance performances.
It is still used in the music behind folk and sufi poetry.
It later became a part of Hindustani music industry.
The instrument consists of a pair of hand drums of contrasting sizes and timbres.
The term tabla is derived from an Arabic word, tabl, which simply means drum.
The tabla is used in some other Asian musical traditions outside of India, such as in the Indonesian dangdut genre.
Its invention would also have complemented the complex early Sitar melodies that Amir Khusrow was composing.
Amir Khusro supposedly created the tabla by splitting the mridangam or the pakhawaj in two.
The earliest known iconography of the tabla dates back to 1799.
Nomenclature and construction.
It is made from a conical piece of mostly teak and rosewood hollowed out to approximately half of its total depth.
The tuning range is limited although different dayan-s are produced in different sizes, each with a different range.
Fine tuning is achieved while striking vertically on the braided portion of the head using a small hammer.
The larger drum, played with the other hand, is called bayan or sometimes dagga, duggi or dhama.
The bayan has a much deeper bass tone, much like its distant cousin, the kettle drum.
The bayan may be made of any of a number of materials.
Sometimes wood is used, especially in old bayans from the Punjab.
Clay is also used, although not favored for durability ; these are generally found in the North-East region of Bengal.
The name of the head areas are :.
Both drum shells are covered with a head constructed from goat or cow skin.
An outer ring of skin is overlaid on the main skin and serves to suppress some of the natural overtones.
The head of each drum has a central area of tuning paste called the syahi.
This is constructed using multiple layers of a paste made from starch mixed with a black powder of various origins.
The rules of Indian music and compositions themselves are taught from a guru to a shishya, in person.
However, the notation is regarded as a matter of taste and is not standardized.
Thus there is no universal system of notation for the rest of the world to study Indian music.
Maula Bakhsh was an Indian musician, singer and poet.
His grandfather was Hazrat Inayat Khan, founder of the Universal Sufism.
Developed the first system of notation for Indian music.
Hindustani classical music has two standard notation systems, one designed by V. N. Bhatkhande and the other by V. D. Paluskar.
These notation systems are used for Indian instruments including the tabla.
Some basic strokes with dayan on right side and bayan on left side are :.
The term gharana is used to specify a lineage of teaching and repertoire in Indian classical music.
Most performers and scholars recognize two styles of tabla gharana : Dilli Baj and Purbi Baj.
Dilli baj comes from the style that developed in Delhi, and Purbi baj developed in the area east of Delhi.
Delhi Baj is also known as Chati baj.
Musicians then recognize seven gharanas - schools or traditions - of tabla.
These traditions appeared or evolved in presumably the following order :.
Each gharana is traditionally set apart from the others by unique aspects of the compositional and playing styles of its exponents.
For instance, some gharanas have different tabla positioning and bol techniques.
Gharana secrets were closely guarded and often only passed along family lines.
Being born into or marrying into a lineage holding family was often the only way to gain access to this knowledge.
There is much debate as to whether the concept of gharana even still applies to modern players.
Jori and Dhama traditions.
North Indian Traditions.
The tal form of playing is very rhythmic as it features various sets of beats, such as 10, 12, and 16.
Portrait of Genius.
Portrait of Genius is a 1964 LP album by Hindustani classical musician Ravi Shankar.
It was digitally remastered and released in CD format by Angel Records in 1998.
Matthew Greenwald of Allmusic described the album as essential for any fan of Shankar or Indian music.
Pandita Tripti Mukherjee is an Indian classical vocalist.
She belongs to Mewati Gharana.
She is the founder and director of the Pandit Jasraj Institute for Music, Research, Artistry and Appreciation.
Tripti Mukherjee is a senior disciple of Padma Vibhushan Pandit Jasraj.
Pta Triptiji has received great recognition for her stellar performances at a multitude of locations across the world.
She is a regular artiste for All India Radio and national Indian Television.
Some of her prominent performances across the globe are mentioned below :.
Pta Tripti Mukherjee is the recipient of several awards including :.
Ranjit Makkuni is an international multimedia artist and designer, the director of the design think tank, the Sacred World Research Laboratory.
His major works are several museum projects : Eternal Gandhi Multimedia Museum,.
Planet Health Museum, The Goddess and Temples of Music, and The Crossing : Living, Dying and Transformation in Banaras.
Education and research.
Ranjit obtained a B.Arch.
from IIT, Kharagpur, and a Masters in Design Theory and Methods from University of California Los Angeles.
He is a member of the mentoring group of Nehru Memorial Museum, New Delhi, constituted by the Prime Minister of India.
Works done at Xerox Palo Alto Research Center.
In 1989, The Electronic Sketchbook of Tibetan Thangka Painting was displayed in the Asian Art Museum of San Francisco.
This project brought the footprints of multimedia computing technology to India.
Works done at Sacred World Research Laboratory.
The project was a pioneering demonstration of physical computing, and culturally personalized computing hardware and interactions.
New Instruments with embedded computation demonstrate tactile computing, i.e., interaction with computers through gesture and kinaesthetic action.
In addition, through responsive computing, people by their position, gesture, and movements control musical events in the environment.
In 2013, Ranjit launched Musical Landscapes and the Goddesses of Music at the National Museum, New Delhi.
This exhibition explores the science, art and spirituality of Music, and its reflections in the Goddess images across Asian cultures.
Ranjit Makkuni studied sitar under the tutelage of maestro Ustad Ali Akbar Khan, and carries jewels of composition from bygone eras.
- ul-Mashaik Pyaromir Maheboob Khan was born in Baroda, India.
Their grandfather Maula Bakhsh recognized his ability in improvisation and trained him in music with Inayat.
He settled in The Hague, marrying a Dutch disciple, Shadbiy van Goens, who bore him two children, Raheemunnisa and Mahmood.
In Europe, Maheboob learned musical composition and singing with composer and musicologist Edmond Bailly.
Maheboob had a particularly strong voice, but Maheboob, musical, intelligent, thoughtful and retiring, would rarely sing for others.
He composed more than 60 sacred songs.
Barbara Blatherwick, the coloratura soprano, performed his songs in her recital in 1937 at the New York Town Hall.
Spirituality - the Tuning of the Heart by Shaikh-ul-Mashaikh Maheboob Khan.
Toward the One Volume four.
Spring 2003 pp. 66-68.
Krishna Das is a U.S. vocalist known for his performances of Hindu devotional music known as kirtan.
With eight albums released since 1996, Das is perhaps the best known U.S. singer of kirtan-style music.
He is also sometimes referred to as the Rockstar of Yoga.
He has released several CDs, and he travels around the world giving performances and teaching, sometimes with Ram Dass.
In recent years he also has often led workshops in combination with leading meditation teacher Sharon Salzberg.
He has also offered workshops with yoga teacher Dharma Mittra.
In India, he visits Rishikesh for practicing Yoga and meditation.
Krishna Das is arguably the best known U.S. singer of Indian kirtan-style devotional music.
, Deva Premal, Girish, Shantala and David Newman.
Krishna Das has recorded numerous variations of Hanuman Chalisa, a 40 stanza Hindi devotional poem to Hanuman by Tulsidas.
In recent years, he has also performed and recorded the traditional gospel song, Jesus is on the Mainline.
He has commented that he read the Gospels while in India and, they sound a lot different at 10,000 feet.
He also remarked that there has been some criticism about an ex-Jewish boy chanting the name of Jesus.
Krishna Dass harmonium bears an image of Hanuman, and he generally wears red T-shirts when he performs.
Krishna Dass musical style is distinctly Western, using chord progressions typical of Western popular music.
The kirtans he leads often build from a slow, meditative tempo to a high paced catharsis.
It is common for his audiences to stand up and dance during some of his Hare Krishna chants.
The ensembles with which Krishna Das performs change frequently.
He is usually accompanied by a tabla player, other percussions, strings, or electric bass guitar, or guitar.
Often, he is accompanied on kartals by Nina Rao.
Krishna Das has been associated with many other artists.
Two of his albums have featured Hans Christian as a guest multi-instrumentalist, and Sting appears on the album Pilgrim Heart.
He has also appeared on an album with Baird Hersey & Prana entitled Gathering In The Light.
Krishna Das has written about how his Guru put him onto the path of Kirtan, and a quotation follows :.
How can I serve you in America ?.
He looked at me with mock disgust and said, What is this ?.
If you ask how you should serve then it is no longer service.
Do what you want.
I couldnt believe my ears.
How could doing what I wanted to do be of service to him ?.
I didnt have that kind of faith.
I just sat there, stunned.
My mind was blank.
It was time for me to leave for Delhi, to catch the plane back to the States.
He was looking at me and laughing.
I felt like I was moving in a dream.
I floated across the courtyard and bowed to him one more time from a distance.
As I did, the words came to me, I will sing to you in America.
Soon afterwards, during the full moon in September, Neem Karoli Baba left his body.
Now he had to be found within.
His album, Live Ananda was nominated for the 2013 Grammy Award for Best New Age Album.
He performed at the Grammy Awards Ceremony as well.
Anusara Yoga Invocation.
Friend describes this composition as occurring during a summer night at a secluded mountain retreat center in Utah in 1998.
In 2011 and 2012, a documentary was made about Krishna Das called One Track Heart : The Story of Krishna Das.
At the Woodstock Festival.
At The Woodstock Festival was released at the end of 1969 on World Pacific Records.
Recorded 15 August 1969.
Ravi Shankar was the first artist to have anything released from the Woodstock Festival.
Released on CD in 1991 by BGO Records.
He was born in Jharia and brought up at Noamundi and Bokaro Steel City.
He trained under Acharya Jagadish, Bholanath Prasanna, Raghunath Seth and Ajoy Chakravorty.
He has been awarded with Rajakiya Sanskritik Samman by the Government of Jharkhand.
He has also been awarded Sur Mani, Bismillah Samman and many other awards.
As one of the leading classical instrumentalists from Jharkhand Chetan Joshi has performed in various concerts over the last fifteen years.
In 2003 he performed in the cultural fest.
organised by the Govt.
of Jharkhand on World Music day.
Raghavendran Rajasekaran Tamil : raakveentirnnn raajceekrnnn Sanskrit : raaghvendrn raajshekhrn, popularly known as Ragha, is a classical flautist based in Singapore.
Born in Singapore to a musically inclined couple, Ragha is the son of Smt.
Nalini Rajasekaran and Sri Rajasekaran.
He has two siblings, an elder brother, Mr.Jeevagajendran Rajasekaran and a younger sister, Ms. R. Nithiya Saraswathi.
Listening to his fathers singing from young, Ragha began to develop a deep interest in Music.
Seeing his mother playing the Veena, the young musician used to accompany her and try his hand on it.
Realizing his interest towards music, his parents began searching a guru for him.
He also had special training from Trichy L. Saravanan and Pt.
Ronu Majumdar with a scholarship from National Arts Council Singapore.
Performances and Accolades.
Some of his accomplishments are :.
Apart from these, he often gives free performances of his various compositions in Esplanade Concourse, Singapore.
Bands and Music affiliations.
Ragha, a budding musician of ace quality, has an undying spirit in experimenting and creating splendid music.
Apart from being a musician, Ragha has served in the Singapore Police Force as Special Constable Sergeant during his National Service.
During his School days, he was a soccer player.
He has won many accolades in running, showing his skills as a good athlete.
He likes to play guitar.
He is an avid composer and has scored music for several dance recitals and dramas.
Some of his popular compositions include Karna Ranjani, Charukesi and Saraswathi set in tune to respective ragas.
Currently he is pursuing his degree in Music from Lasalle College of Arts and Music.
He is a recognised flautist in Singapore and has accompanied several musicians in recitals and concerts.
He also instructs several students in Singapore and Johor Bahru.
He is a devout Hindu and has performed in several temple functions in Singapore and abroad.
Apart from musical interests, he has a good set of culinary skills.
His specialities include Tofu Sambal and Biryani.
Pandit Ulhas N Kashalkar is a Hindustani classical vocalist.
He has received training in the Gwalior, Jaipur and Agra gharanas, and is considered a representative of all three schools.
Pandit Ulhas Kashalkar was born in Nagpur.
He went on to study music at Nagpur University, topping his post-graduate class.
Around that time, he trained under Rajabhau Kogje and P N Khardenavis.
Indian music is heavily influenced by the Guru-shishya tradition.
Kashalkar studied principally under Pandit Ram Marathe and Gajananrao Joshi.
Ram Marathe, popularly referred to as Rambhau, was a vocalist in the Gwalior tradition.
Pandit Marathe also trained in the Agra style for fifteen years under Jagannathbua Purohit.
That apart, he was a prominent actor and music director in the Marathi stage.
Kashalkar undertook a long period of tutelage under him.
Indeed, most characteristic features of his style can be traced to Gajananraos vocalism.
Ulhas Kashalkar initially worked as a programme executive at the Thane station of All India Radio.
In 1993 he became a Guru at the ITC Sangeet Research Academy, where he remains today.
As a musician.
Both Rambhau and Gajananrao were traditionalists which finds reflection in Kashalkars vocalism.
He possesses the ability to switch between three styles, at times even in the course of a single performance.
He adheres to the aesthetic contours of each individual style, and also to the formal demands of the raga being presented.
He is noted for his authentic presentations of obscure traditional ragas.
In an uncharacteristically expansive passage, the veteran music critic Prakash Wadhera once noted :.
Like a computer he never errs in any raga or composition howsoever intertwined or tricky it may be.
As a teacher.
Indian music today is witness to a situation where senior musicians fail to produce disciples of adequate merit.
Ulhas Kashalkar is an exception to this phenomenon.
As resident Guru at the ITC Sangeet Research Academy, he has mentored several excellent students.
Rajendra Prasanna, ; born 15 April 1956  is an exponent of Bansuri and Shehnai of India.
Rajendra Prasanna was born in Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India.
He learned music from his father Pt.
Raghunath Prasanna and from his uncles Bholanath Prasanna, Vishnu Prasanna.
His family moved to Delhi in early seventies, later he became the disciple of Hafeez Ahmed Khan and Sarfaraz Hussain Khan.
He also learnt style of light classical of Benaras Gharana from Pt.
Mahadev Mishra of Varanasi.
He is known for playing the difficult ragas like Shri, Kedar with purity and maturity.
He has toured different countries of Europe, America, Asia, Australia.
His collaboration with Pandit Ravi Shankar for Concert for George in London.
Awards and honors.
Grammy Award certificate for his participation in Concert for George in 2004.
Indian Classical Music by Rajendra Prasanna - T-Series.
Colors of life.
Tribute to Pt.
Enchanting of Himalayas.
A tribute to Ustad Bismillah Khan - 2006.
The word jugalbandi means, literally, entwined twins.
The duet can be either vocal or instrumental.
More rarely, the musicians may be from different traditions.
What defines jugalbandi is that the two soloists be on an equal footing.
In jugalbandi, both musicians act as lead players, and a playful competition exists between the two performers.
They stand as a classical example of the amalgamation of art, poetry and classical music in medieval India.
The paintings depict not just the Ragas, but also their wives, , their numerous sons and daughters.
The Ragas in Ragamala.
Six are male ragas ; the thirty raginis are their wives and the remaining forty-eight are their sons.
These are listed is as follows :.
Wives : Bhairavi, Bilawali, Punyaki, Bangli, Aslekhi.
Sons : Pancham, Harakh, Disakh, Bangal, Madhu, Madhava, Lalit, Bilaval.
Wives : Gaundkari, Devagandhari, Gandhari, Seehute, Dhanasri.
Sons : Maru, Mustang, Mewara, Parbal, Chand, Khokhat, Bhora, Nad.
Wives : Telangi, Devkari, Basanti, Sindhoori, Aheeri.
Sons : Surmanand, Bhasker, Chandra-Bimb, Mangalan, Ban, Binoda, Basant, Kamoda.
Wives : Kachheli, Patmanjari, Todi, Kamodi, Gujri.
Sons : Kaalanka, Kuntal, Rama, Kamal, Kusum, Champak, Gaura, Kanra.
Wives : Bairavi, Karnati, Gauri, Asavari, Sindhavi.
Sons : Salu, Sarag, Sagra, Gaund, Gambhir, Gund, Kumbh, Hamir.
Wives : Sorath, Gaundi-Malari, Asa, Gunguni, Sooho.
Sons : Biradhar, Gajdhar, Kedara, Jablidhar, Nut, Jaldhara, Sankar, Syama.
Pandit Raghunath Prasanna was an Indian classical shehnai and flute player.
Personal Life and family.
Raghunath Prasanna was born in 1913 in Varanasi in the state of Uttar Pradesh.
He was married to Saraswati Devi.
They had seven children.
One of them is well-known flute & shehnai player Rajendra Prasanna.
Pandit Raghunath Prasanna was not only a legendary flute and shehnai player.
Pandit Raghu nath Prasanna also played sarod.
Hari Prasad Chaurasia used to call him Bade Guruji means grand teacher.
Vishnu Prasanna, Pandit Rajendra Prasanna, Pandit Ronu Mujamdar and many others flautists.
He has numerous disciples like Pt.
Bholanath Prasanna, Pt.
Vishnu Prasanna, his son.
Rajendra Prasanna, Pt.
Pranav Mukherjee, Pt.
Bhanu Majumdar, Pt.
Anant Lal, and Ustaad Shivpreet Singh.
He is the first person in India to introduce a folk instrument in Classical music.
Ravi Shankar and Ustad Ali Akbar Khan in the year 1955.
Awards & Honors.
The title Prasanna have been entitled to Pandit Raghunath by the king of Kuch Bihar.
The king honored him as Pandit Raghu Nath Prasanna made audience happy, from then he has been named as Prasanna.
He also had lessons in vocal music from late Muktipada Datta, a representative of Agra Gharana.
Anjan also learned tabla under the late Ustad Shaukat Ali Khan of Farukhabad gharana.
Anjan lives in Calcutta and teaches music.
Anjan has performed in hundreds of concerts in India and abroad.
Among them worthy of mentions are some of his concerts in India :.
In his musical career, Anjan has got numerous awards, and felicitations.
The chronology of awards are as follows :.
Vishnu Govind Jog, better known as V. G. Jog, was an Indian violinist.
Jog was a disciple of Baba Allauddin Khan.
He performed and recorded with many of the greatest Hindustani musicians of the 20th century and toured the world.
He frequently performed for All India Radio s Calcutta division.
He received the Padma Bhushan award in 1982.
He also taught at the Ali Akbar College of Music.
Beginning in 1999, he suffered from Parkinsons disease, and also suffered from respiratory problems in his later years.
His career as a highly active and successful performer has spanned almost five decades.
Born in Mumbai in 1922, he received his early training from S. C. Athavale and the late Ganpat Rao Purohit.
An unassuming person of infinite charm, he is also regarded as an incomparable accompanist.
His duets with Ustad Bismillah Khan have met with spectacular successes in India and abroad.
In 1985, he performed to great acclaim under the auspices of the Festival of India in the United States.
Pandit Jog was awarded the Padma Bhushan in 1982.
After prolonged illness Pandit Jog died on Jan 31, 2004 in South Calcutta.
Shri Jog had his early training under Shri Shankar Rao Athavie, Ganpat Rao Purohit, and V. Shastry.
Later he received extensive training from Dr.S.N.Ratanjankar and Ustad Allauddin Khan.
He has often enlightened audiences according to their taste with lighter themes and folk tunes, flowing with tilting and sparkling grace.
His book Behala Shiksha, published in 1944, is recognized as a major piece of authoritative literature on the subject.
He joined All India Radio in1953 and served as music producer.
He retired as deputy chief producer, All India Radio.
He was unquestionably the Violin Samrat for all time to come.
Sri Lankas Pandith Amaradeva is a student of V.G Jog.
Since 1999, Pandit Jog had been suffering from Parkinsons disease.
Without music, his only source of income, the high cost of medical care became an unbearable burden for the Jog family.
Dadra refers to two separate but originally linked concepts in Hindustani classical music.
This is a Hindustani classical tala, consisting of six beats in two equal divisions of three.
The most commonly accepted theka or basic pattern for this tala is dha dhi na, dha tu na.
It was originally accompanied by dadra tala, but later dadra compositions are often found in other light talas.
Sarpada is a raga in Hindustani classical music.
It is a Bhilawal raga sung in the morning.
Amir Khusrau, the father of modern Hindustani music, is said to have created about twelve new melodies, among which is Sarpada.
Aparna is an Indian classical vocalist living in Pune, Maharashtra, India.
The systematic online training method developed by her won her a lot of disciples across the globe.
She performs with the band The Khayal Groove consisting of Indian bassist Jayen Varma and French drummer Jean Davoisne.
Early life and family.
Panshikar had an early introduction to north Indian classical music.
Her first guru is late Pandit Bhaskarbua Joshi and is currently training under her mother Meera Panshikar.
She is married to Nikhil Joshi and has a son Sohum Bilawal Nikhil Joshi.
Stephen Day is an American composer, producer, instrumentalist, vocalist and teacher.
Background and career.
He works in multiple genres, including Western classical, Indian classical, jazz, folk, and rock music.
Stephen Days performance career has taken him to twenty-one countries throughout Europe, North America and Asia.
His audiences are people from all nations, castes and creeds who are seeking to enrich their own spiritual awareness.
Benares gharana is one of the six most common styles of playing of the Indian tabla.
The Benares tabla gharana was developed a little over 200 years ago by Ram Sahai.
Ram Sahai began studying the tabla with his father from the age of five.
At the age of nine, he moved to Lucknow to become the disciple of Modhu Khan of the Lucknow gharana.
Modhu Khan agreed, on the condition that Ram Sahai would not be interrupted until he finished playing.
Shortly after this performance, Ram Sahai returned to Benares.
After some time performing in Benares, Ram Sahai felt the need to make a significant change in his tabla playing.
He also composed numerous compositions within existing compositional forms and created new forms, such as uthan, Benarsi theka, and fard.
Sharda Sahai was the 5th generation of tabla players in the family.
Both are the direct descendents of Ram Sahai.
The gharana is categorized into the Purbi baj, which includes the Farukhabad, Lucknow, and Benares gharanas.
The Benares style makes use of the more resonant strokes of tabla, such as Na, and Din.
Benares tabla players are successful in all forms of tabla playing, including tabla solo, instrumental, vocal, and dance accompaniment.
The 7th generation consists of Kumar Bose, Aditya Sahai, Krishna Sahai and Shubham Sahai.
Other noted artist include Kanthe Maharaj, uncle and Guru of Kishan Maharaj, and whose disciples were Badri Maharaj, Ashutosh Bhattacharya.
The Benares baj makes use of over twenty different compositional types, and has an enormously varied repertoire of each type.
A shruti box is a small wooden instrument that traditionally works on a system of bellows.
It is used as an accompaniment to other instruments and notably the flute.
Adjustable buttons allow tuning.
Nowadays, electronic shruti boxes are commonly used, which are called shruti petti in Tamil and Telugu and sur peti in Hindi.
Some forms of music such as Yakshagana used the pungi reedpipe as drone.
After the Western small pump harmonium became popular, musicians would modify the harmonium to automatically produce the reference pitch.
Typically, one would open up the cover and adjust the stop of the harmonium to produce a drone.
Later, a keyless version of the harmonium was invented for the specific purpose of producing the drone sound.
It was given the name shruti box or sruti box.
These instruments had controls on the top or on the side of the box for controlling the pitch.
More recently Scottish folk artist Karine Polwart has championed the instrument, using it on some of her songs.
Singers find it very useful as an accompaniment and instrumentalists enjoy the drone reference it gives to play along with.
Saptak Festival of Music.
The festival features both emerging talents and established performers.
Besides pure classical music, it also includes performances of folk music, classical dance forms, and semi-classical forms such as thumri.
Early life and education.
Born and brought up in Pune, he completed his graduation from Wadia College, in Pune and studied contemporary music.
He also studied at Fergusson College, Pune.
In late 1950s he studied under sitar player Pandit Ravi Shankar, and Umashankar Misra, and also learnt Indian classical vocals.
He also studied contemporary Western music and jazz.
He worked with Merzbow, Sonic Youth and Throbbing Gristle and was a big fan of experimental and noise music.
He also received acclaim for his music for P. L. Deshpande s Marathi play Teen Paishacha Tamasha.
The Yard Went on Forever was his multi-volume autobiography published in 2008.
Guru Rao Deshpande was a singer from Karnataka, India.
His father, Narayanrao Deshpande, was a Carnatic musician who planned for his son to become a lawyer.
However, the young Gururao had exhibited an intense attraction for Hindustani classical music.
His parents had him tutored by vocalists Dattopant Joshi and T. K.Pitre, when he was just ten years old.
Renowned musician Bhimsen Joshi did not hear Gururao Deshpande sing until the latter was well known.
He then celebrated  Shastabdi Samaroh  for Gururao Deshpande on 14 April 1962, in Pune.
During this function, guest of honour Krishna Rao described Deshpande 's music as the  finest of pearls strung together.
Gururao and literature.
He was versed both in Kannada and English and enjoyed reading both languages.
He mastered Kumaravyasa Bharata and Lakshmish Bharata, the two great epics of Kannada literature.
His innovation was to recite both these epics in Hindustani music Gamaka style, inspired by Bharat Bindurao.
He earned presenting the long discourses of Kumaravyasa and Lakshmisha Bharata.
Throughout these Gamaka recitals across the State, Gururao was accompanied by Betageri Krishna Sharma, who provided the Vyakhyana.
The Gamaka conference at Hubli crowned Gururao with the title Gamaka Gauri Shankara.
Gnyanpeeth poet D. R. Bendre kept close association with Gururao via discussions of Kannada literature.
Gururao was equally proficient in English.
He passed Inter Arts and admired Wordsworth, Milton and Shakespeare.
Gururao studied astrology and practiced it for leisure.
Rimpa Siva is an Indian musician known for being one of the few female tabla players.
She was taught to play the Farukhabad gharana style by her father, Prof. Swapan Siva.
She was the subject of the 1999 French documentary film Rimpa Siva : Princess of Tabla.
Philip V. Francis.
Philip V. Francis was a tabla player, composer and Ghazal singer from Kerala, India.
He died at the age of 43 in a bike accident, leaving his wife and son.
Francis was born in Thrissur, Kerala.
He then migrated to Delhi to learn Tabla under the maestro Ustad Fiyaz Khan of the Delhi gharana.
Thereafter he emerged as a Tabla player of national repute.
He also learnt carnatic music and mrudangam for brief stints under Komattil Shanta Kumari and Purushothama Sharma of Thrisssur.
He also started composing and conducting Choir in Churches in and around Thrissur.
He also worked with the late music Director Raveendran as an assistant in some films.
Awards and achievements.
of India recognised his talents and in 2003 he was deputed to Guyana, West Indies as a cultural ambassador by ICCR.
He was back to Kerala after his contract was over in 2007.
His last work as a music director was for the film Oridathoru Puzhayundu directed by Kalavoor Ravikumar.
Habeebi El rooh 2000  miamiband Kuwait.
As a tribute music lovers of Thrissur formed Piano, an organisation in his memory which aims to promote music and harmony.
Piano was formally inaugurated by the Nightingale of South India, S. Janaki on 3.05.08.
Ustad Fiyaz Khan the Tabla Maestro and Philips Guru was present on the occasion.
Ravi Shankar, KBE, often referred to by the title Pandit, was an Indian musician and composer who played the sitar.
He has been described as the best-known contemporary Indian musician.
He gave up dancing in 1938 to study sitar playing under court musician Allauddin Khan.
Shankar engaged Western music by writing concerti for sitar and orchestra and toured the world in the 1970s and 1980s.
From 1986 to 1992 he served as a nominated member of Rajya Sabha, the upper chamber of the Parliament of India.
Shankar was awarded Indias highest civilian honour, the Bharat Ratna, in 1999, and received three Grammy Awards.
He continued to perform in the 2000s, sometimes with his younger daughter, Anoushka.
Shyam was married to Shankars mother Hemangini Devi, and later worked as a lawyer in London, England.
Shankar shortened the Sanskrit version of his first name, Ravindra, to Ravi, for sun.
Training and work in India.
He often studied with Khans children Ali Akbar Khan and Annapurna Devi.
Shankar completed his training in 1944.
Shankar recomposed the music for the popular song Sare Jahan Se Achcha at the age of 25.
Beginning in the mid-1950s he composed the music for the Apu Trilogy by Satyajit Ray, which became internationally acclaimed.
He was music director for several Hindi movies including Godaan and Anuradha.
1956-69 : International career.
Shankar declined to attend due to problems in his marriage, but recommended Ali Akbar Khan to play instead.
In 1958, Shankar participated in the celebrations of the tenth anniversary of the United Nations and UNESCO music festival in Paris.
From 1961, he toured Europe, the United States, and Australia, and became the first Indian to compose music for non-Indian films.
Chatur Lal accompanied Shankar on tabla until 1962, when Alla Rakha assumed the role.
Shankar founded the Kinnara School of Music in Mumbai in 1962.
Harrison became interested in Indian classical music, bought a sitar and used it to record the song Norwegian Wood.
This led to Indian music being used by other musicians and created the raga rock trend.
During the visit, a documentary film about Shankar named Raga was shot by Howard Worth, and released in 1971.
In 1968, he scored for the movie Charly.
He performed at the Woodstock Festival in August 1969, and found he disliked the venue.
In the 1970s Shankar distanced himself from the hippie movement.
1970-2012 : International career.
In late 1970, the London Symphony Orchestra invited Shankar to compose a concerto with sitar.
Concerto for Sitar and Orchestra was performed with Andre Previn as conductor and Shankar playing the sitar.
Hans Neuhoff of Musik in Geschichte und Gegenwart has criticised the usage of the orchestra in this concert as amateurish.
George Harrison organized the charity Concert for Bangladesh in August 1971, in which Shankar participated.
In his absence, Shankars sister-in-law, singer Lakshmi Shankar, conducted the touring orchestra.
The touring band visited the White House on invitation of John Gardner Ford, son of U.S. President Gerald Ford.
Shankar composed the dance drama Ghanashyam in 1989.
Shankar underwent an angioplasty in 1992 due to heart problems, after which George Harrison involved himself in several of Shankars projects.
He performed in between 25 and 40 concerts every year during the late 1990s.
This performance was recorded and is available on CD.
Lento 7:52 minutes, III.
Scherzo 8:49 minutes IV.
Finale 14:50 minutes.
Style and contributions.
Shankar developed a style distinct from that of his contemporaries and incorporated influences from rhythm practices of Carnatic music.
Shankar often closed his performances with a piece inspired by the light-classical thumri genre.
Shankar has been considered one of the top sitar players of the second half of the 20th century.
Narayana Menon of The New Grove Dictionary noted Shankars liking for rhythmic novelties, among them the use of unconventional rhythmic cycles.
Shankars interplay with Alla Rakha improved appreciation for tabla playing in Hindustani classical music.
Shankar promoted the jugalbandi duet concert style and introduced new ragas, including Tilak Shyam, Nat Bhairav and Bairagi.
He was awarded the Sangeet Natak Akademi Award for 1962, and was named a Fellow of the academy for 1975.
Shankar was awarded honorary degrees from universities in India and the United States.
The American jazz saxophonist John Coltrane named his son Ravi Coltrane after Shankar.
In 2010, Shankar received an Honorary Doctor of Laws from the University of Melbourne, Australia.
He was also awarded Frances highest civilian honour, the Knight of the Legion of Honour.
He was the first recipient of the Tagore Award in recognition of his outstanding contribution to cultural harmony and universal values.
He received a posthumous nomination in the 56th Annual Grammy Awards for his album The Living Room Sessions Part 2.
Personal life and family.
Shankar married Allauddin Khans daughter Annapurna Devi in 1941 and his son Shubhendra Shankar was born in 1942.
Shankar separated from Devi during the 1940s and had a relationship with Kamala Shastri, a dancer, beginning in the late 1940s.
An affair with Sue Jones, a New York concert producer, led to the birth of Norah Jones in 1979.
After separating from Kamala Shastri in 1981, Anoushka Shankar was born to Shankar and Sukanya Rajan.
Shankar, however, lived with Sue Jones until 1986.
He married Sukanya Rajan, whom he had known since the 1970s in 1989 at Chilkur Temple in Hyderabad, India.
Shubhendra Shubho Shankar often accompanied his father on tours.
He could play the sitar and surbahar, but elected not to pursue a solo career.
He died in 1992.
Norah Jones became a successful musician in the 2000s, winning eight Grammy Awards in 2003.
Anoushka Shankar was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best World Music Album in 2003.
Anoushka and her father were nominated for Best World Music Album at the 2013 Grammy Awards for separate albums.
Shankar was a Hindu and a vegetarian.
He wore a large diamond ring which he said was  manifested  by Sathya Sai Baba.
He lived with Sukanya in Encinitas, California.
Shankar performed his final concert, with daughter Anoushka, on 4 November 2012 at the Terrace Theater in Long Beach, California.
Illness and death.
He died on 11 December 2012 at around 16:30 PST.
According to his spokesman, Stuart Wolferman, Shankar died at a hospital near his home in Encinitas, California.
His cabinet colleague Minister of State for Communications & IT Milind Deora wrote : Being a maestro wasnt his only achievement.
Pandit Ravi Shankar sold Brand India better than anyone else.
May his soul rest in peace.
Anoushka and he played together in perfect unison.
A torch was passed.
Santoor players Shiv Kumar Sharma said : It is a great loss, not just to Indian music but to world music.
He was a world musician.
Novelist Hari Kunzru added on Twitter : RIP Pandit Ravi Shankar.
My father performed hand surgery on him.
His death was also noted in the international and foreign language media.
Category EMI Classics artists.
Historically, mehfils were presented in the homes or palaces of Muslim royalty or noblemen, who acted as these artists patrons.
Today they are generally given in the homes of especially avid music lovers.
Ghazals are a common genre performed at mehfils.
Such performances are rarer today than in the past.
Mehfil-e-Naat is an Islamic mehfil in which people sit and recite poetry in the praise of the Prophet Muhammad.
Mehfil-e-Sama is a gathering held for Sufi devotional music such as Qawwali or prayer and chanting, Hadhra, part of Dhikr.
Several mehfil performances may be seen in the Satyajit Ray film Jalsaghar.
Shounak Abhisheki  Devanagari : shaunk abhissekii is an Indian vocalist, composer of classical, semi-classical, and devotional music.
Shounak Abhisheki, the son and disciple of Maestro Pt.
Jitendra Abhisheki, is a vocalist who combines Agra and Jaipur styles of Hindustani Classical Music.
Albhisheki trained under Smt.
Kamaltai Tambe of the Jaipur Gharana.
Shounak has performed special programs such as Swarabhishek, Tulsi Ke Ram & Kabir and Abhang, based on on his fathers compositions.
Shounak has been recorded by Sony Music, Music Today, Times Music, Ninad Music, Music Curry, and Fountain Music.
Harballabh Sangeet Sammelan.
The first Sammelan was held in 1875 at the Sidh Peeth-Shri Devi Talab, in Jalandhar.
Since then it has been held every year.
This festival was declared as one of the National Festivals by the Department of Tourism, Govt.
Father of the Nation, Mahatma Gandhi accompanied by Vishnu Digambar Paluskar visited Baba Harballabh Sangeet Sammelan in the year 1919.
The festival attracts thousands of music lovers from all over the India and abroad every year.
This number is increasing year after year.
In 1956 a Sangeet Academy was constructed under the banner of Swami Hariballabh.
The main aim of the festival was to attract and encourage more and more people for the development of classical Music.
There is a Shiva lingam in the temple nearby and one adores the exquisite phallic image of Lord Shiva.
On the day of the fair there is also free lodging and accommodation.
It is held near the Samadhi of Saint Harballabh, from the 27th to 30 December.
During this time reputed musicians from all over India gather in Jalandhar to celebrate Indian Classical Music.
Chandra Nath Shastri.
He belongs to the Benares Gharana of Hindustani Classical Music.
He is retired Staff Artist in All India Radio and also performed regularly for Doordarshan - Indian National Television Channels.
In addition to his musical abilities, he is also an expert Astrologer.
Early Life and Family.
Soon his parents and family shifted to Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India.
Where later he has his training in Banaras Gharana.
He comes with a family link with the Indian Poet, Lyricist, Writer, Nobel Prize winner Rabindra Nath Tagore.
His grandmother, Smt.
Indira Devi was niece of Rabindra Nath Tagore.
He had also done many Theater, film Acting performances and some Theater Direction in his life time.
Chandra Nath Shastri done his schooling from C. M. Anglo Bengali Inter College, Varanasi, U.P.
After that he done his Graduation in Science from Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi.
Then from the age of just 5, Chandra Nath Shastri had started learning from his Guruji Pandit Anokhelal Mishra of Banaras.
He and his elder brother Partha Nath Shastry used to go to Pandit AnokhelalJi together to learn Tabla.
After death of Tabla Samrat he also took lessons from Pandit Ramji Mishra.
Taking guidance from his Gurujis he became an excellent 5th generation Tabla maestro of Banaras Gharana.
Chandra Nath Shastri Became The Champion in All India Radio National Competition just at the very young age of 23.
As a regular performer in TV and radio and stage, till now he has done several thousands of performances and recordings.
Now he is retired from All India Radio, Calcutta.
He has judged many musical competitions and talent hunt contests.
He is also a Pakhawaj, Khol, Mridangam and other Indian percussion instruments expert.
Achievements and Recognitions.
Chandra Nath Shastri Became The Champion in All India Radio National Competition in 1972.
Chandra Nath Shastri is awarded with many prestigious awards for his excellence in music.
He also got awarded by President of India for his Tabla playing skills.
He perform both as a accompanist as well as a soloist.
He is recognized as Taalmani for his excellence in rhythm and melody on Tabla.
He has done several thousands of performances and recordings in All India Radio and Doordarshan.
He enjoys teaching Tabla and other musical instrument to students all around the world.
Beside Music, Chandra Nath Shastri also studies and research about Spirituality and on how it effect our life.
He is also an expert Astrologer.
Nityanand Haldipur is a performer and teacher of the Indian bamboo flute, known in India as the bansuri.
He is a purist in the true Maihar Gharana tradition, at present learning from Ma Annapurna Devi, in Mumbai, India.
Nityanand was born in Mumbai into a musical family and showed indications of prodigious abilities at a very young age.
His father, Niranjan Haldipur, a senior disciple of Pannalal Ghosh, initiated him into the art of flute-playing.
Over the next two decades, Nityanands training continued under the late Chidanand Nagarkar, and Devendra Murdeshwar.
Since 1986, Nityanand has been learning from Padma Bhushan Srimati Annapurna Devi, doyenne of the Maihar gharana.
As a Guru, Nityanand adheres to the strict discipline of the traditional Indian Guru-shishya tradition.
Nityanand imparts his musical insights to students through many instruments like the flute, saxophone, violin, guitar and vocals.
He has been visiting faculty at prestigious institutions like Bhatkhande Music Institute Deemed University, Lucknow, UP, India.
He has toured all over India, giving numerous lecture demonstrations on music, for eminent organizations like SPIC MACAY.
He conducts a series of listening sessions, on Baba Allauddin Khan Saheb, all over India.
Nityanands performances are a perfect blend of style and substance.
He has performed at various musical events worldwide :.
Nityanand is a regular broadcaster of the All India Radio and Doordarshan.
He retired from All India Radio in 2008, after 22 years of service.
Nityanand has produced and hosted several shows on All India Radio.
Maihar Mystique : Nityanand Haldipur - Flute, Sandeep Bhattacharya - Tabla.
Maihar Gharana : Nityanand Haldipur - Flute, Aneesh Pradhan - Tabla.
Masters of the Reed : Nityanand Haldipur - Flute, Sadanand Naimpalli - Tabla.
Haldipur has received the following awards :.
Tomi Koivusaari is the rhythm guitarist and former vocalist of the Finnish metal band Amorphis.
The band played thrash metal, recorded a demo and an EP.
He also formed a death/doom band called Abhorrence in 1989, and recorded a demo and an EP.
Both bands broke up in 1990, but Tomi was not a member of Violent Solution since he formed Abhorrence.
In 1990, Tomi, Esa, Jan and bass guitarist Olli-Pekka Laine formed Amorphis.
In 1996, Tomi formed Ajattara with Pasi Koskinen.
He used the Samuel Lempo name in the band.
Gauhar Jaan was an Indian singer and dancer from Calcutta.
Gauhar Jaan was born as Angelina Yeoward in on 26 June 1873 in Azamgarh, of Armenian descent.
Victoria, an Indian by birth, had been trained in music and dance.
Later, Victoria, converted to Islam and changed Angelinas name to Gauhar Jaan and hers to Malka Jaan.
Soon she also started writing and composing ghazals under the pen-name ` Hamdam ' and became proficient in Rabindra Sangeet.
Gauhar Jan started performing in Calcutta in 1896 and was called the first dancing girl in her records.
She would round off her performances for a record by announcing My name is Gohar Jan.
Indias first-ever record.
Gauhar Jaan agreed to do the recording session for a princely sum of 3,000 rupees.
By 1903, her records started appearing in Indian markets and were in great demand.
Restoration & release.
Her songs are also part of the Vintage Music From India audio album, and her image forms its cover.
- Gauhar Jan of Patiala ;.
- Miss Gohar, who was associated with Parsi Theatrical Company in Bombay ;.
- Gohar Bai Karnataki of Bijapur.
Anoushka Shankar is an Indian sitar player and composer, and daughter of Ravi Shankar and half sister of Norah Jones.
Anoushka Shankar was born in London into a Bengali Hindu family, and her childhood was divided between London and Delhi.
She is a daughter of Indian sitar maestro Ravi Shankar and Sukanya Shankar.
She is also the paternal half-sister of American singer Norah Jones, and Shubhendra Shubho Shankar, who died in 1992.
As a teenager, she lived in Encinitas, California and attended San Dieguito Academy.
A 1999 honors graduate, Shankar then decided to pursue a career in music rather than attend college.
Shankar gave her first public performance at the age of 13 at Siri Fort in New Delhi.
She released her first album, Anoushka, in 1998, followed by Anourag in 2000.
2005 brought the release of her fourth album RISE, earning her another Grammy nomination in the Best Contemporary World Music category.
In February 2006 she became the first Indian to play at the Grammy Awards.
Shankar, in collaboration with Karsh Kale, released Breathing Under Water on 28 August 2007.
It is a mix of classical sitar and electronica beats and melodies.
Notable guest vocals included her paternal half-sister Norah Jones, Sting, and her father, who performed a sitar duet with her.
Shankar has made many guest appearances on recordings by other artists, among them Sting, Lenny Kravitz and Thievery Corporation.
Most recently Shankar has collaborated with Herbie Hancock on his latest record The Imagine Project.
Shankar has given soloist performances of her fathers 1st Concerto for Sitar and Orchestra worldwide.
Acting and writing.
Shankar has also ventured into acting  and writing.
She wrote a biography of her father, , in 2002 and has contributed chapters to various books.
Shankar recorded her following album in Madrid, Spain.
She was the principal performer in the entire first set or Indian portion of the concert.
She opened the show by playing a solo sitar instrumental titled Your Eyes.
Also on the sitar, she performed George Harrison s The Inner Light with Jeff Lynne.
Lastly, she conducted a new composition, Arpan, written by her father.
The composition featured Eric Clapton playing acoustic guitar.
The concert was modelled after Ravi Shankars benefit concert with Harrison, the 1971 Concert for Bangladesh.
Shankar and Jethro Tull postponed a concert scheduled for 29 November 2008 in Mumbai after the 2008 Mumbai attacks.
Shankar is a supporter of animal rights and People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals.
She and her father appeared in a thirty-second public-service announcement against animal suffering.
Anoushka is also the spokesperson for the United Nations World Food Programme in India.
Shankar lives between the United States, the United Kingdom, and India.
She is married to British director Joe Wright and their first child, Zubin Shankar Wright, was born on 22 February 2011.
Cheez means composition in Indian classical music, especially in vocal music of Hindustani music.
Closely related to bandish or compositions for instrumental music.
E.g. Bol Taans can be sung by utilizing the words of the Cheez.
The main components are meaningful words, which are set in a raga structure correlating with a tala.
Nowadays Cheez finds its synonym in the term Vasta, which refers on its own to the plot of dramaturgic venture.
William Rory Gallagher was an Irish blues-rock multi-instrumentalist, songwriter, and bandleader.
He was a talented guitarist known for his charismatic performances and dedication to his craft.
Gallaghers albums have sold in excess of 30 million copies worldwide.
The Theatre in Ballyshannon where Monica once acted is now called the Rory Gallagher Theatre.
Both sons were musically inclined and encouraged by their parents.
At age nine, Gallagher received his first guitar from them.
He built on his burgeoning ability on ukulele in teaching himself to play the guitar and perform at minor functions.
Gallagher was initially attracted to skiffle after hearing Lonnie Donegan on the radio.
Donegan frequently covered blues and folk performers from the United States.
He relied entirely on radio programs and television.
While still in school, playing songs by Buddy Holly and Eddie Cochran, he discovered his greatest influence in Muddy Waters.
Subsequently, Gallagher began experimenting with folk, blues, and rock music.
Influences he discovered, and cited as he progressed, included Woody Guthrie, Big Bill Broonzy, and Lead Belly.
Initially, Gallagher struck out after just an acoustic sound.
Singing and later using a brace for his harmonica, Gallagher taught himself to play slide guitar.
By his mid-teens, he began experimenting heavily with different blues styles.
Gallagher began playing after school with Irish showbands, while still a young teenager.
In 1963, he joined one named Fontana, a sextet playing the popular hit songs of the day.
The band toured Ireland and the United Kingdom, earning the money for the payments that were due on his Stratocaster guitar.
Gallagher left with the bassist and drummer to perform as a trio in Hamburg, Germany.
In 1966, Gallagher returned to Ireland and, experimenting with other musicians back home in Cork, decided to form his own band.
The latter appeared long after the bands break-up, which occurred shortly after their appearance at the 1970 Isle of Wight Festival.
The 1970s were Gallaghers most prolific period.
He produced ten albums in that decade, including two live albums, Live in Europe and Irish Tour 74.
November 1971 saw the release of his album, Deuce.
In the same year he was voted Melody Maker s International Top Musician of the Year, ahead of Eric Clapton.
He is documented in the 1974 film Irish Tour 74, directed by Tony Palmer.
The line-up which included Rod deAth on drums and Lou Martin on keyboards, performed together between 1973 and 1978.
However, he eventually dropped down to just bass, guitar and drums, and his act became a power trio.
Other releases from that period include Against the Grain, Calling Card, Photo-Finish and Top Priority.
He recorded two Peel Sessions, both in February 1973 and containing the same tracks, but only the first was broadcast.
Along with Little Feat and Roger McGuinn, Gallagher performed the first Rockpalast live concert at the Grugahalle, Essen, Germany in 1977.
Gallagher collaborated with Jerry Lee Lewis and Muddy Waters on their respective London Sessions in the mid-1970s.
He played on Lonnie Donegans final album.
He was David Coverdale s second choice to replace Ritchie Blackmore in Deep Purple.
Gallagher chose to perform in his own band.
In the 1980s he continued recording, producing Jinx, Defender, and Fresh Evidence.
After Fresh Evidence, he embarked on a tour of the United States.
In addition he played with Box of Frogs -- a band formed in 1983 by former members of The Yardbirds.
Becoming obsessive over details and plagued by self-doubt, Gallagher nevertheless retained a loyal fanbase.
During this period he stated I agonize too much.
Notes From San Francisco, an album of unreleased studio tracks and a San Francisco 1979 concert was released in May 2011.
1970-1972 : Gerry McAvoy, bass guitarist, and drummer Wilgar Campbell.
1972-1976 : Gerry McAvoy, keyboardist Lou Martin, and drummer Rod deAth.
1976-1981 : Gerry McAvoy, Ted McKenna.
1981-1991 : Gerry McAvoy, Brendan ONeil + frequent guest : Mark Feltham.
1992-1994 : David Levy, Jim Levaton, John Cooke, Richard Newman and frequent guest Mark Feltham, on harmonica.
Guitars and equipment.
Gallagher was always associated with his well-worn sunburst 1961 Stratocaster, which his brother Donal has officially retired.
Connolly ordered a cherry red Stratocaster through Crowleys music shop in Cork in 1961.
The guitar was extensively modified by Gallagher.
The tuning pegs are odd, and all of these have been found to be replacements.
Second, it is thought that the nut has been replaced and interchanged a number of times.
Third, the scratchplate was changed during Gallaghers time with Taste.
The pick-ups -- none of which are original -- were also changed.
He also installed a 5-way selector switch in place of the vintage 3-way one.
All of the wear was caused by Rorys playing, not misuse.
A borrowed Telecaster was also stolen at the same time but never recovered.
When the Strat was recovered after two weeks, Gallagher swore he would never sell it or paint it after that.
Joe opened both nights performances with his rendition of Cradle Rock using Rorys Stratocaster.
Photos and video of the performance can be seen on the official Rory Gallagher website.
Rorys biographer Marcus Connaughton believes the Strat was the key to Rorys sound.
Rory could talk about it all night.
` Its dated November 1961 - in certain peoples opinions this is when Fender hit their peak.
I like the maple neck.
This is the best, its my life, this is my best friend.
Its almost like knowing its weak spots are strong spots.
Amplifiers and effects.
Examples of this sound can be heard on the Taste albums, as well as the album Live in Europe.
The British company, Flynn Amps, now makes a Rory Gallagher Signature Hawk Treble Booster pedal based on Gallaghers original unit.
Gallagher also used Ibanez Tube Screamers, an MXR Dyna Comp, and various Boss effects, often using a Flanger and Octaver.
An example of this sound can be heard on the Irish Tour 74 album.
He also had a Fender Concert amplifier.
He also began using Marshall combos.
Not that well known is his use of various German amplifiers.
He used Stramp 2100a amps, which can be seen in his appearances on the German Beat Club program.
Another company that hand built amplifiers for Gallagher was PCL Vintage Amp.
The company is located in St. Wendel in the Saarland and they still produce high quality audio and guitar equipment.
In the later years of his life Gallagher developed a phobia of flying.
To overcome this he received a prescription for a powerful sedative.
This medication, combined with his alcohol use resulted in severe liver damage.
Despite this he continued touring.
He was unmarried and had no children.
Gallagher was buried in St Olivers Cemetery, on the Clash Road just outside Ballincollig near Cork City, Ireland.
His headstone is a replica of an award he received in 1972 for International Guitarist of the Year.
In 2003, Wheels Within Wheels, a collection of acoustic tracks, was released posthumously by Gallaghers brother Donal Gallagher.
Collaborators on this album included Bert Jansch, Martin Carthy, The Dubliners and Lonnie Donegan.
and he sits and tells us.
So I owe Rory Gallagher my sound.
In 2010, Gallagher was ranked No. 42 on Gibson.coms List of their Top 50 Guitarists of All Time.
Gallagher was also listed on Rolling Stone magazines list of the 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time, ranked at 57th place.
Begum Parveen Sultana is an Assamese Hindustani classical singer of the Patiala Gharana.
Parveen was born at Daccapatty in Nagaon city, Assam, India to Ikramul Mazid and Maroofa Begum.
She went to Mission School.
Her father was her first guru and was very strict with her.
She also received early training from her grandfather Mohammed Najeef Khan, a Pathan.
She later went to Kolkata to learn music under the guidance of late Chinmoy Lahiri.
In 1973, she became a disciple of Dilshad Khan of the Patiala Gharana.
Parveen gave her first stage performance in 1962 when she was only 12 and has been recording music since 1965.
Sultana has sung for movies such as, Kudrat, Do Boond Pani, and Pakeezah.
Recently, she sang the theme song of Vikram Bhatt s 1920.
She also sang Humein Tumse Pyaar Kitna for the film Kudrat in 1981.
She has recorded for HMV, Polydor, Music India, Bharat Records, Auvidis, Magnasound, Sonodisc, Amigo.
She was conferred the Padmashri in 1976, at the age of 25.
She is married to Dilshad Khan.
They have a daughter, Shadaab Sultana.
Prem Joshua is a German musician, active since 1991.
At the age of 18, he traveled overland to India studying the indigenous folk music of countries along the way.
On reaching India, Joshua learned to play the sitar from Ustad Usman Khan and Osho.
Osho inspired him and his music.
This was really coming home !.
Throughout his career, he has experimented with various forms of music, creating a blend of the East and the West.
His music has immensely contributed to the Asian Underground and fusion scene.
He subsequently released four solo albums and formed the band,  Hamsafar , with which he released one album.
Chintan Relenberg -- Loops, Keyboards, Darbouka, Tabla, Vocals.
Raul Sengupta -- Tabla, Percussion, Vocals.
Satgyan Fukuda -- Bass, Percussion, Vocals.
Prem Joshua -- Sitar, Flute, Saxophone, Dilruba, Santoor, Vocals.
Runa Rizvi -- featured vocalist.
West Meets East.
West Meets East is an album by American violinist Yehudi Menuhin and Indian sitar virtuoso Ravi Shankar, released in 1966.
At the Bath Festival, Barham had translated Shankars interpretation of Raga Tilang into Western annotation for Menuhins benefit.
When making West Meets East, Shankar rewrote this Tilang-based piece, recording it with Menuhin as Swara Kakali.
The albums opening selection is Prabhati, a Shankar composition based on Raga Gunakali, and played by Menuhin and Rakha.
This piece was written by Romanian composer George Enescu, who had been Yehudi Menuhins teacher.
All selections by Ravi Shankar except where noted.
Thumri is a common genre of semi - classical Indian music.
The text is romantic or devotional in nature, and usually revolves around a girls love for Krishna.
The lyrics are usually in Uttar Pradesh dialects of Hindi called Awadhi and Brij Bhasha.
Thumri is characterized by its sensuality, and by a greater flexibility with the raga.
Like Indian classical music itself, some of these forms have their origin in folk literature and music.
Some of the most commonly used ragas are Pilu, Kafi, Khamaj, Gara, Tilak Kamod and Bhairavi.
Thumri arose in popularity during the 19th century in the Lucknow court of nawab Wajid Ali Shah.
At that time it used to be a song sung by courtesans accompanied by dance.
That was the bandish ki thumri or bol bant ki thumri.
Since Varanasi is to the east of Lucknow, the new style became known as Poorab ang or eastern style thumri.
Noted Thumri artists.
Other famous singers of thumri are Gauhar Jan, Begum Akhtar, Shobha Gurtu, Noor Jehan and Prabha Atre.
Shobha Gurtu is often regarded as the thumri queen.
Today thumri is sometimes sung at the end of khyal concerts as a concluding item.
Besides the tabla and the tanpura, other typical instruments in thumri are sarangi, and swarmandal.
Thumri singers pay considerable attention to the lyrics, though they may be difficult to follow in the ornamented enunciation.
This is especially where the focus is on love, and many lyrics deal with separation or viraha.
Krishnas ras leela or love play with Radha and other gopis of Vrindavan appear frequently.
Braj or Vrindavan is where Krishna is indulging in this love play ; Radha is the girl of Braj.
West Meets East, Volume 2.
The album contains a version of the piece played at the United Nations, an interpretation of Raga Piloo.
According to Shankars comments to Rolling Stone magazine in March 1968, they recorded this selection just a few days ago.
All selections by Ravi Shankar except where noted.
Viram Jasani is a Kenyan-born Indian sitar and tabla composer and musician.
He was awarded an honorary degree from the University of York in March 2007.
Indore gharana is one of the vocal gharanas of Indian classical music.
Amir Khan grew up in Indore, but he did not like the factionalism inherent in the gharana tradition.
In an interview to Akashvani Indore he said.
The merukhand structure is similar to that practiced by Ustad Aman Ali Khan of the Bhendibazaar gharana.
The khayal gayaki in the Indore gharana retains the slow development and restraint from frills as in the dhrupad.
Amir Khans conviction about the importance of poetry in khyal compositions, has also marked the singing of the Indore gharana.
Characteristics of the Indore gharana include :.
Direct disciples of Amir Khan included Pandith Amarnath, Shankar Lal Mishra, Kankana Banerjee, Purvi Mukherjee, and others.
However, a number of influential musicians including Sultan Khan have grown up in its folds.
Virasat is a cultural festival comprising all aspects of Indian cultural heritage, and is held at various educational institutions across India.
PARAMPARA is like a mini-version VIRASAT, and includes 2-5 of the modules of Virasat.
Virasat 2008, began on September 2, 2008 with concerts in Delhi and 300 towns all over the country.
and continued till December 2008.
Hariprasad Chaurasia at the Vice-Regal Lodge, Delhi University.
Artistes like, Pt.
Birju Maharaj, Pt.
Shivkumar Sharma, T.N. Seshagopalan, Alarmel Valli, Pt.
Vishwa Mohan Bhatt, Shovana Narayan, Pt.
Rajan and Sajan Misra, Teejan Bai also participated in the series.
Mohanrao Palekar was a noted Hindustani classical vocalist and is considered a stalwart of Jaipur-Atrauli Gharana, commonly referred as Jaipur Gharana.
Mohanrao was born in a musically oriented middle class family.
Like many marathi singers, Mohanrao moved to Hindustani Classical Music via Natya Sangeet.
He first joined Bharat Natak Mandali as a stage actor.
Here Mohanrao was not getting any opportunities to showcase his natural musical talent.
Later, he worked with Govindrao Tembe s Shivraj Natak Mandali, and there his talent got new opportunity and direction.
However, Mohanrao recognized Ahmed Khan sahibs talent and became his disciple.
Needless to say that Mohanrao got taleem in the truest tradition of the gharana.
He also got ample opportunities to listen to great musicians ad libitum.
He was well known for creating style and technique of the Jaipur gayaki.
Therefore, he was not widely known to the general public.
However, he was very highly revered among the knowledgeable and cognoscenti musicians, artists and listeners.
His disciples include Pt.
Ratnakar Pai, Manohar Potdar, Pt.
G. T. Tilak, Krishnarao Chonakar, Kishori Amonkar, Kamal Pathare, Suresh Haldankar, Bhalchandra Patekar etc.
G. K. Nimkar : prthm maasik shraaddhdinaanimitt vaahilele pricypussp - a brief biographical sketch after the first month.
Mushtaq Ali Khan.
Mushtaq Ali Khan and was an Indian sitar, surbahar player.
His father Ashiq Ali Khan was a renowned sitar player.
His musical ancestor tree includes Masit Sen, the originator of Masitkhani Baaj.
He was recognized as the foremost representative of the Senia gharana of sitar playing in the mid-20th century.
At first a court musician at Jaunpur, he left the court to pursue an independent career.
He started playing for All India Radio in 1929, and performed at the 1931 Sangeet Sammelan in Allahabad.
At the time of his death he was known as a musicians musician.
Training and lineage.
Khan started his instruction at the age of 6.
He eschewed much of the ornamentation of modern sitar technique, and embraced a clean, pure sound.
Mushtaq Ali Khan was an eminent Sitar player of Senia Gharana.
Khan Sahab had his lineage with fifth vani, called Dhandvani named after one of the forefathers.
The famous dhrupadiya of Shah Jahans Court, Nayak Dhundhu.
It is also called Rasal Vani for its beauty.
He said, ... two of my ancestors, Jaggu Khan and Makku Khan.
That is why we play Surbahar with three Mezrabs.
The Surbahar was originally designed to felicitate the playing of Alap.
Those days Alap was the exclusive prerogative of the Beenkar.
Indian music conferences, awards, recognitions.
Mushtaq Ali Khan was awarded the Sangeet Natak Academy award in 1968.
In 1973/74 he received the title of D.Litt from Rabindra Bharati University.
The Indian government appointed him as the Professor Emeritus in Education and the Cultural Ministry and gave fellowship.
Pupils and followers.
His foremost disciples are Nirmal Guha Thakurta, Netai Bose, Shipra Chaudhury, Steven Landsberg and Dr. Debu Chaudhuri.
Latter is now the only living and/or active amongst this quartet.
Steven Landsberg is Khansahibs only student to have studied the Surbahar, the technique with three mizrabas, and tarparan.
On 1953 had a Subahar recital in Raga Purya, in the First National Programme of the All India Radio New Delhi.
He was a musicians musician and that is why he always shied away from the commercial attention.
Instead Mushtag Ali Khan organised conferences where old masters and new artists were introduced to the cognoscenti and the novice.
Among the well known names, Pandit Ravi Shankar was first presented by him to the public in Calcutta.
Ustad had his undisputed popularity and demand during the early thirties to late forties.
He died on 21 July 1989.
Chaturprahar is an annual Indian classical music festival held at National Centre for Performing Arts in Mumbai, India.
It is based on the concept of association of time with the ragas.
2011 saw the inception of this festival.
It usually takes place in the month of September every year.
The festival started in 2011 at NCPA, Mumbai.
It explores various ragas associated with different times of the day.
Singing these ragas at their particular times brings out the most in them.
Since 2011, the following artists have embraces the stage with their performances at Chaturprahar :.
Kaushiki Chakrabarty performed in the morning session.
Smt Devaki Pandit performed in the afternoon session.
She brought out the best in her while rendering ragas like Shuddha Sarang and Madhmad and Badhans Sarang.
Pandit Ulhas Kashalkar performed in both the morning and late afternoon/evening sessions.
In the evening session, he rendered, in his soulful voice, Raga Dhanasree, Raga Multani.
This year saw performances from stalwarts like Gundecha brothers, Ashwini Bhide Deshpande and Jayteerth Mevundi.
He is known for his elaborate stage performances and music videos.
On December 1, 2011, Kravitz was made an Officer of the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres.
He plays the role of Cinna in the Hunger Games film series.
Kravitz was born in New York City on May 26, 1964.
His father was from a Russian Jewish family.
His mother was of Bahamian and African-American descent, and was from a Christian family.
During his early years, Kravitz did not grow up in a religious environment.
After a spiritual experience when he was thirteen, he started attending church, becoming a non-denominational Christian.
Kravitz began banging on pots and pans in the kitchen, playing them as drums at the age of three.
At the age of five, he wanted to be a musician.
He began playing the drums and soon added guitar.
Kravitz grew up listening to the music his parents listened to : R&B ;, jazz, classical, opera, gospel, and blues.
Around the age of seven, he saw The Jackson 5 perform at Madison Square Garden, which became his favorite group.
Ellington even played Happy Birthday for him one year when he was about 5.
Kravitz often went to see New York theater, where his mother worked.
His mother encouraged his dreams of pursuing music.
In 1974, the Kravitz family relocated to Los Angeles when Kravitzs mother landed her role on The Jeffersons.
He took part in Mahlers Third Symphony at the Hollywood Bowl.
I was attracted to the cool style, the girls, the rock n roll lifestyle, Kravitz said.
Kravitz attended Beverly Hills High School.
Maria McKee, actor Nicolas Cage and musician Slash were his classmates.
In 1978, Kravitz was accepted into the schools well-respected music program.
He taught himself to play piano and bass, and made friends with Zoro who would later become his long-time collaborator.
Kravitz wanted to be a session musician.
He also appeared as an actor in television commercials during this time.
1989-90 : Virgin Records and career debut.
Kravitz would go on to collaborate with Hirsch on most of his albums.
Kravitz met saxophonist Karl Denson and invited him to play on the song, Let Love Rule.
Kravitz was so impressed with his playing that Denson played on much of the album.
Denson toured with Kravitz for the next five years.
Smith had also worked with Kravitz mother Roxie Roker, on the hit sitcom The Jeffersons.
Kravitz urged Smith to manage his career and assist him in finding a record deal.
In less than a month of shopping the recordings, five labels were in a bidding war for Kravitz.
Eventually a deal was made with Virgin Records in January 1989, and signed by Virgin A & R executive Nancy Jeffries.
On Smiths urging, Kravitz dropped the name Romeo Blue and reclaimed the Lenny Kravitz moniker.
About his time as Romeo Blue, Kravitz said, Ultimately, it got me back to myself.
And when I finally did accept myself for myself, music started flowing out of me.
Lisa Bonet directed the debut music video for the title track, Let Love Rule.
They included a childhood friend, Zoro on drums, Adam Widoff, Lebron Scott, Kenneth Crouch and Karl Denson on saxophone.
In May 2009, a 20th Anniversary Deluxe Edition of Let Love Rule was released worldwide by Virgin.
The double disk includes a booklet with rare photos, and 18 additional demos, bonus tracks and live recordings.
Kravitz launched a LLR tour of Europe and the United States in support of the re-release.
1991-2001 : Popularity established.
In 1990, Kravitz produced the song Justify My Love for Madonna, which he co-wrote with Ingrid Chavez.
Kravitz separated from Lisa Bonet in 1991, amid rumors of an affair between him and Madonna.
Kravitz has denied any infidelity.
Kravitz and Bonet divorced in 1993.
In 1991, Kravitz produced the self-titled album Vanessa Paradis for French singer and actress Vanessa Paradis.
He played most of the instruments and co-wrote most of the songs on the album.
He also released his second album, Mama Said, which was his first album to reach the Top 40.
The songs on the album were about Bonet and dedicated to her, documenting his depression over their breakup.
Kravitzs biggest single yet, It Aint Over Til Its Over, went to number 2 on the Billboard Hot 100.
The single Always on the Run, a tribute to his mother, featured Slash on guitar.
Stand By My Woman and What Goes Around Comes Around followed.
Sean Lennon co-wrote and played piano on the song All I Ever Wanted.
The event featured rare RHO memorabilia and the work of Rolling Stone photographer Mark Seliger.
That year Kravitz also got to work with idols Al Green and Curtis Mayfield.
This album was the first to feature guitarist Craig Ross, who has also played on all his subsequent albums.
In 1993, he also released the EP Spinning Around Over You, which included four live tracks from his Universal Love Tour.
A feature documentary about his 1994 tour entitled Alive From Planet Earth was directed by Doug Nichol and released.
In 1994, Kravitz recorded a funk-rock version of the song Deuce, for the KISS cover album.
The track featured Stevie Wonder on harmonica and background vocals.
This song was one of three radio singles from the album, and was also the albums lead-off track.
Roxie Roker, Kravitzs mother, died in California on December 2, 1995, of breast cancer at the age of 66.
During a break from music, Kravitz took time out to train some wrestlers, most notable, CM Punk and Dean Ambrose.
However, the album only had two hit singles : Rock and Roll Is Dead and Cant Get You Off My Mind.
With 5, Kravitz embraced digital technology such as Pro Tools and samplers for the first time.
For the I Belong to You video Lenny can be seen without his signature dreadlocks.
In 1999 he produced and sang with Cree Summer on her solo album Street Faerie.
Kravitz released a Greatest Hits album in 2000.
2001-05 : Lenny and Baptism.
Kravitz released his sixth album Lenny in October 2001.
The album was recorded in Miami.
The bank teller who was robbed was then brought to the scene and said Kravitz was not the bank robber.
Miami Police later sent officers to Kravitzs home to apologize for the detention.
The video was later shot off the coast Miami.
He won his fourth Grammy in 2002.
Stillness of Heart, Believe in Me, and If I Could Fall In Love were subsequent singles from the album.
Kravitz was the subject of a photo book by former chief photographer for Rolling Stone, Mark Seliger.
Published in November 2001, Seliger captures Kravitz on tour, with family, with friends and in posed portraits.
Jay-Z invited Kravitz to appear on the track Guns and Roses on his 2002.
In September 2002, Kravitz appeared alongside other rock stars in the episode How I Spent My Strummer Vacation of The Simpsons.
The track reached # 1 on the world internet download charts and MP3.com download chart.
In late 2004, Kravitz dated actress Nicole Kidman and reportedly dedicated his hit song Lady to her.
They split in 2005.
Kravitzs seventh album Baptism was released in May 2004.
The first single was Where Are We Runnin ?.
The single California failed to be commercially successful, but Storm, featuring Jay-Z, reached the charts.
Also in 2004, he appeared on N.E.R.D s album Fly or Die.
Kravitz served as the opening act for Aerosmith who are long term friends of Kravitz on their fall 2005 tour.
The tour began on October 30 at the Mohegan Sun Arena in Uncasville, Connecticut.
The night before that tour started, October 29, 2005, Lennys father TV Producer Sy Kravitz died.
Lenny then dedicated Let Love Rule to his father.
That tour was so successful that it was extended through February 25, 2006 and ended in Anaheim, California.
2006-09 : Live Earth, charity work, and It Is Time for a Love Revolution.
In January 2006, Kravitz contributed Breathe to absoluttracks, a project sponsored by Absolut Vodka.
This song was re-mixed by ten musical producers and distributed via the internet.
Kravitz appeared in the audience of Madonnas Confessions Tour during numerous shows.
Kravitz had already played there on March 21, 2005, drawing 300,000 people on a concert of his own.
The Live Earth concert, with eight other acts on the bill, including Pharrell and Macy Gray, took 400,000 to the beach.
Also in 2007, Kravitz released a version of Cold Turkey by John Lennon on the charity CD.
Kravitz also spent time recording his latest album, It Is Time for a Love Revolution, released February 5, 2008.
On September 25, 2007, the Fats Domino tribute album Goin Home ; A Tribute To Fats Domino was released.
The video premiered on VH1s Top 20 Countdown at number 3.
The tour started in Santa Monica, California and ended in New York City on February 1.
The tour was done in association with Myspace and called the Get on the Bus tour.
Steven Tyler of Aerosmith, a close friend of Lennys would appear at The Orpheum Theater in Boston.
The winners were featured in the YRB February Edition alongside Lenny Kravitz in a magazine pull-out.
The photo shoot took place at the Electric Factory in Philadelphia on stage.
The winners pull out was featured in another issue of YRB which had Lil Wayne on the cover.
On February 11, 2008, Kravitz was admitted to Miami Hospital suffering from severe bronchitis.
He had been suffering from a series of severe respiratory tract infections since mid-January, and the illness developed into bronchitis.
On March 19, 2008 he canceled the South American part of his tour due to the same illness.
The decision affected planned concerts in Colombia, Mexico, Brazil and Argentina.
In Argentina Kravitz had a performance in the biggest rock festival there, Quilmes Rock Fest.
Kravitz made his feature film acting debut in Precious which premiered at the Sundance Film Festival in January 2009.
Shows scheduled for Rome on June 5 and Brescia on June 6 were postponed to late July.
2009-12 : U2 tour and Black and White America.
Kravitzs next album, tentatively titled Funk, was tentatively re-titled Negrophilia and was due out sometime in 2010.
This is believed to be a project that Kravitz has been working on since 1997.
On his Twitter page, Kravitz said that the album title was Negrophilia but then felt like something else.
Eventually the album was later named Black and White America.
On June 6, 2011 the second single Stand was released.
It was announced that Kravitz would be supporting U2 on their 360 Tour on the second North American leg in 2010.
Kravitz agreed to support them for four shows.
Though the shows were postponed until 2011, Kravitz remained committed for four of the shows.
In June 2010 it was announced that Kravitz would guest star on an episode of the upcoming season of Entourage.
The movie was released on March 23, 2012.
Kravitz joins other American recipients such as Martin Scorsese, George Clooney, and Bob Dylan.
On November 22, 2012, Lenny Kravitz performed during halftime of the Jets-Patriots Thanksgiving night game.
In 1985, Kravitzs parents divorced, which had a profound impact on him.
His relationship with his father became extremely strained.
Kravitz focused on his music to help him get through this period.
That year, Kravitz met actress Lisa Bonet backstage at a New Edition concert.
Bonet worked on The Cosby Show, the number one rated show on television.
They were close friends for two years before falling in love.
Like Kravitz, Bonet is half African American and half Russian Jewish.
Kravitz moved back to New York City where The Cosby Show was produced in 1987, moving in with then girlfriend Bonet.
Kravitz and Bonet eloped to be married on November 16, 1987, her 20th birthday, in a Las Vegas ceremony.
Kravitz, still known as Romeo Blue at the time, suddenly found himself in the headlines of tabloid newspapers.
They had a daughter, Zoe Isabella Kravitz, born on December 1, 1988.
Kravitz and Bonet divorced in 1993.
In 2001, he began dating model Adriana Lima.
In 2002, the couple was engaged, but less than a year later, the engagement was called off.
During another interview Kravitz stated, Im half Jewish, Im half black, I look in-between.
He also notes that spirituality has been an important issue in my growth, given his upbringing by parents of different faiths.
colspan = 3 style = background : #DAA 520 ;| Grammy Award.
colspan = 3 style = background : #DAA 520 ;| MTV Video Music Awards.
Ganayogi Panchakshara Gawai.
Ganayogi Panchakshara Gawai was a blind singer from Gadag, a town in southern state of Karnataka, India.
He was born at Kadashettihalli in Hangal Taluk, Karnataka.
His school Veereshwara Punyashrama was a premier learning center for Hindustani Music.
The Kannada film Ganayogi Panchakshari Gavayi is based on his real life incidents.
In Hindustani music, meend refers to a glide from one note to another.
It is an essential performance practice, and is used often in vocal and instrumental music.
It is considered a sort of alankar, or ornament.
The sitar is a plucked stringed instrument used mainly in Hindustani music and Indian classical music.
The sitar flourished in the 16th and 17th centuries and arrived at its present form in the 18th century Mughal period.
It derives its distinctive timbre and resonance from sympathetic strings, bridge design, a long hollow neck and a gourd resonating chamber.
Etymology and history.
The Hindi word sitar originally derives from Persian seh + tar, literally meaning three strings.
It is named after a Persian instrument called the setar.
Hazrat Amir Khusro, the great Sufi musical and poetic genius, laid the foundation for its development.
The sitar flourished in the 16th and 17th centuries and arrived at its present form in the 18th century Mughal period.
Construction of the similar tanpura was described by Tansen.
During the time of Moghul Empire in the Indian subcontinent from about 1526 to 1857.
A sitar can have 18, 19 or 20 strings.
The frets are movable, allowing fine tuning.
Its timbre results from the way the strings interact with the wide, sloping bridge.
The maintenance of this specific tone by shaping the bridge is called jawari.
Many musicians rely on instrument makers to adjust this.
The bridges are fixed to the main resonating chamber, or kaddu, at the base of the instrument.
Some sitars have a secondary resonator, the tumbaa, near the top of the hollow neck.
The instruments bridges are made of deer horn, ebony, or very occasionally from camel bone.
Synthetic material is now common as well.
Sitar construction styles.
There are three popular modern styles of sitar offered in a variety of sub-styles and decorative patterns.
The two popular styles are the gayaki style sitars and the full decorated instrumental style sitars.
The gayaki style sitar is mostly of seasoned toon wood, with very few or no carved decorations.
It often has a dark polish.
The inlay decorations are mostly of mother of pearl.
The number of sympathetic strings is often limited to eleven but may extend to thirteen.
Jawari grinding styles are also different, as is the thickness of the tabli.
The other type of sitar, the instrumental style, is most often made of seasoned toon wood, but sometimes made of teak.
It is often fitted with a second resonator, a small tumba on the neck.
It typically has thirteen sympathetic strings.
It is said that the best Burma teak sitars are made from teak that has been seasoned for generations.
The sources of very old seasoned wood are a highly guarded trade secret and sometimes a mystery.
There are various additional sub styles and cross mixes of styles in sitars, according to customer preferences.
Most importantly, there are some differences in preferences for the positioning of sympathetic string pegs.
Amongst all sitar styles there are student styles, beginner models, semi-pro styles, pro-models, master models, and so on.
Prices are often determined by the manufacturers name and not by looks alone or materials used.
Some sitars by certain manufacturers fetch very high collectible prices.
Most notable are older Rikhi Ram and older Hiren Roy sitars depending upon which master built the instrument.
It has 6 strings, and lacks movable frets.
Tuning depends on the sitarists school or style, tradition and each artists personal preference.
The player should re-tune for each raga.
In one or more of the more common tunings the playable strings are strung in this fashion :.
By playing the chikari strings with this tuning, one produces a chord.
There is a lot of stylistic variance within these tunings and like most Indian stringed instruments, there is no default tuning.
Mostly, tunings vary by schools of teaching and the piece that is meant to be played.
The instrument is balanced between the players left foot and right knee.
The hands move freely without having to carry any of the instruments weight.
The player plucks the string using a metallic pick or plectrum called a mizraab.
The thumb stays anchored on the top of the fretboard just above the main gourd.
Generally only the index and middle fingers are used for fingering although a few players occasionally use the third.
Adept players bring in charisma through use of special techniques like Kan, Krintan, Murki, Zamzama etc.
They also use special Mizrab Bol-s, as in Misrabani and create Chhand-s even in odd-numbered Tal-s like Jhoomra.
World music influence.
The Doors extensively used Indian and near eastern scales in their psychedelic soundscapes.
Robbie Kriegers guitar playing in The End is saturated in sitar melodic influence.
Gualberto Garcia Perez.
Gualberto Garcia Perez is a musician credited with creating Flamenco Fusion, also called Rock Andaluz.
Gualberto was born in 1945 in Sevilla, Spain.
His maternal grandfather was a jack-of-all-trades who sung Flamenco, nicknamed Currillo el Calentero.
His Mother, Pastora Perez Peral, was an amateur flamenco singer well-regarded by her neighbors.
Gualberto entered the Salesians school where his two passions in life were formed : football and music.
There, he began to establish himself as a composer.
This first solo recording has not been released yet.
His early works feature the voice and lyrics of his first wife.
Return to Spain.
Returning to Spain he published two solo albums : A la vida al dolor and Vericuetos.
In 1979 he recorded a fusion album between cantejondo songs and sitar called Gualberto and Agujetas.
During this decade he made mostly orchestration arrangements, such as flamenco and classical instrumentation.
Gualberto has also directed the choir Rociero de Triana longer than any other director in its history.
Under his direction, many successful albums were released.
In 1990 he returned to the performing scene, touring for a long summer.
From this period, the first Cycle of the New Music at the University of Seville stands out.
Also from this period is the album Sin Commentario, released later by Lost Vinyl in 1996.
Ghagge Nazir Khan of Jodhpur.
The gharana gained visibility and following the latter-half of the 20th Century after acclaimed contemporary vocalist Pt.
The musical ancestors of Ghagge Nazir Khan, the fountainhead of the Mewati Gharana, were exponents and descendants of the Gwalior Gharana.
Eventually, these changes resulted in the Mewati gayaki and became distinct although reminiscent of the Gwalior style.
It is for this reason that the Mewati Gharana is considered both musically and genealogically different from the Gwalior style.
Ghagge Nazir Khan passed on his musical tradition to his foremost disciples, Pandit Natthulal and Chimanlal Pandit.
During this period, Mewati musicians were under monarchical patronage for their music.
Jyotiram later became a disciple of Rajab Ali Khan, bringing elements of the Jaipur and Kirana gayakis into the Mewati style.
Motiram passed this tradition to his sons, Pandit Maniram and Pratap Narayan Pandit.
Mewati Gharana styles and trends.
Although it has ancestry in the style and trends of the Gwalior gharana, the Mewati Gharana gayaki has some distinct qualities.
Elements of Hinduism and Shia Islam are simultaneously and polytheistically incorporated throughout musical works.
Mewati gayaki includes substantial use of sargam and tihais.
Specialty ragas and compositions.
Several ragas unique to the Mewati Gharana include Jaiwanti Todi, Din Ki Puriya, Odhav Bageshree, Khamaj Bahar and Bhavani Bahaar.
Jasraj has added many devotional compositions to the Gharana repertoire, the most popular being, Om Namo Bhagavate Vasudevaya in Bhimpalasi.
He was known for his khyal and dhrupad renditions, besides Rabindra Sangeet.
He also sang thumri, and most notably the thumri, Kon Gali Gayo Shyam, in Raga Mishra Khamaj, which he popularized.
As a musicologist, he published several books of rare compositions with musical notations, including dhrupad and Rabindra Sangeet.
Thereafter he shifted to Kolkata.
Early life and background.
All his three sons, Ramprasanna Banerjee, Gopeswar Banerjee and Surendranath Banerjee were all singers and also musicologists.
They did valuable documentation and music notation work in the field of Indian classical music.
His younger brother Surendranath Banerjee was also a noted musicians and one of the pioneers of the Bishnupur gharana.
Later remained Principal of the Ramsaran Music College in Bishnupur.
He died in 1972 in Bishnupur.
This turned out to be most fruitful period of his career.
He devoted his time in the research of the theory and history of Indian music.
His surbahar recital along with Khan, where even commercially recorded.
While still in Burdwan, he published Sangita Chandrika in two volumes, an early and important study of musicology in India.
It also included a collection of Bengali and Hindi songs set to music.
His other books on musicology include Geet-Darpan, Geet-Praveshika and Sangeet-Lahari, all in Bengali language.
Once his term as Burdwan came to end, he shifted to Calcutta, where he spent his next 20 years, till 1943.
By now from singing, in time, he had become an eminent musicologist.
He along with his cousin Surendranath Banerjee, compiled a large number of Dhrupad compositions, complete with their musical notations.
His son Ramesh Banerjee also became a singer, while his notable disciples include Rita Ganguly.
Vinod Kumar Dwivedi.
Vinod Kumar Dwivedi is an Indian classical Dhrupad - Dhamar singer, belonging to the Dharbhanga gharana.
During his childhood Dwivedi was trained by his maternal uncle Sadhu Prashad Shukla and by Swami Atmanand in Banda, Uttar Pradesh.
Later he was trained by Kashinath Bodas, Abhay Narayan Malik and Prem Kumar Mallick.
Dwivedi is an artist at AIR and Doordarshan in Lucknow.
He is also an ICCR panel artist, and an examiner at the Lucknow Bhatkhande Vidyapeeth and Allahabad Prayag Sangeet Samiti.
He has performed in many cities in India, including Kanpur, Lucknow, Agra, Chitrakoot, Varanasi, Guwahati, Jaipur, and Mumbai.
He also performed in Colombo, Sri Lanka under a program jointly organised by Bhatkhande Vidyapeeth, Lucknow and ICCR COLOMBO.
Ustad Faiyaz Khan is a Tabla player of international repute and belongs to the Delhi Gharana.
He was born in 1934 at Sikar, Rajasthan, in a family of musicians.
Nazir Khan his father, was a sarangi and tabla - player at the court of the Maharaja of Karoli.
Munir Khan his elder brother is a well-known sarangi player.
His initial training was under Ustad Hidayat Khan.
Then he also learnt under the late Ustad Inam Ali Khan of the Delhi gharana of Tabla.
Ustad Faiyaz Khan has also received training in mridangam from Ramnad Ishwaran.
He began his career in All India Radio Jaipur in 1955.
In 1958 he moved to A.I.R Delhi.
He retired as a staff artist from there in 1993.
He has accompanied many great stalwarts as well as has performed as soloist.
He also has travelled the world extensively, for performances.
In either form, it is thought to have the power of transforming not only the students music, but his whole life.
Chilla is widely used in the Punjab gharana of tabla playing.
Abdul Karim Khan, a singer of the Kirana Gharana, described chilla as lighting a fire under your life.
You either cook or you burn.
If you cook, everyone can enjoy your flavour - otherwise, youll be a mass of cinders, a heap of ash.
Manik Varma is considered the doyen of Hindustani classical Music from the Kirana Gharana, most known for her song, Amrutahuni Goad.
She also excelled in semi-classical and light music like Thumri, Marathi Natya Sangeet, Bhavgeet and Bhakti geet.
She was a disciple of Hirabai Barodekar, daughter of Abdul Karim Khan and Sureshbabu Mane son of Abdul Karim Khan.
, the founder of the Kirana Gharana.
A number of renowned artists including Asha Khadilkar, Shaila Datar were trained under her.
She was legend of Marathi Sugam Sangeet.
Many new singers perform Riyaz of her songs at initial stage of their training.
Her maiden name was Manik Dadarkar.
In her memory Manik Varma Pratishthan was established in Mumbai, which also presents Manik Ratna Award and scholarships.
It also organises function on the birth and death anniversary of Manik Verma.
It was also crowned the best album of the year by Eastern Eye newspaper.
The album was Swamis first in the bands current lineup.
The album cover shows DJ Swami, flanked by the bands two vocalists, S-Endz and MC Sarpanch.
DesiRock Entertainment is the name of DJ Swamis music production company specializing in progressive South Asian electronic music.
B. R. Deodhar.
Professor B. R. Deodhar was an Indian classical singer, musicologist and music educator.
He was a vocalist of Khayal - genre of Hindustani classical music.
Thereafter in 1976, he was awarded the Padma Shri, by Government of India.
Early life and training.
Deodhar was born in Miraj in present Sangli district of Maharashtra on September 11, 1901.
Thereafter, he also received training under Abdul Karim Khan of Kirana gharana and Vinayak Rao Patwardhan, another disciple of Paluskar.
Later he joined the Gandharva Mahavidyalaya, where he became a leading disciple of Vishnu Digambar Paluskar, the founder of institution.
Deodhar was the only student of Paluskar, who was allowed to also pursue formal education.
Thus after matriculation he also pursued higher education and later received a B.A. degree.
He also studied Western classical music.
In time, he also collected musical compositions, rare ragas from all the traditions he was associated with, through his career.
He established the Deodhar School of Music in Mumbai, breaking from the gharana tradition.
He also edited Hindi music monthly magazine, Sangeet Kala Vihar, and also published several books on music and musicians.
This was followed by Padma Shri, by Government of India in 1976.
Amongst his noted disciples, were singer Kumar Gandharva, Saraswati Rane, and Laxmi Ganesh Tewari.
He died on March 10, 1990 in Mumbai.
Gopal Shankar Misra.
Gopal Shankar Misra was an Indian musician and music teacher, who played the vichitra veena.
In his early years he had toured the globe as music-director to dance troupe of Pt.
This left the 22-year-old Gopal a challenge of work unfinished.
Gopal was born in Kanpur, India in 1957.
His sister, Ragini, was born some years later.
His mother was Padma.
Surrounded by and growing up with music, his interest deepened following an international tour with his father.
He had studied vocal music and sitar since the age of four and was interested in cricket and other sports.
At the age of 15 his interest in music turned serious.
His father introduced his son in 1975 at Varanasi.
Chhotelal Mishra disciple of Pandit Anokhelal Mishra, accompanied Gopal who performed a rendering of Marwa, Chandrakauns and Pahadi on sitar.
Gopals mother died of cancer on 5 April 1977.
His father, Lalmani Misra, took the children around the country, performing and meeting academics and musicians.
As a visiting Professor at Penn University, Misra had to leave for a semester.
He recorded ample music lessons for Gopal and Ragini so that both excelled in their respective examinations.
On his return, he developed an ache in his back and had to rely more on his children.
Gopal and Ragini thereby received training in academics of music, which served them much later on.
After the passing away of his mother, Gopal had become devoted to his father and sister.
When his father died, he started training his first student while he himself was learning.
As time went by students traveled from all over to learn Sitar and Vichitra Veena.
His most dedicated disciple was his sister, Ragini.
Today Ragini is the sole exponent of Misrabani.
She plays the complex Misrabani compositions on Jhoomra Tal.
She presented 16 Pearls a non-stop string of sixteen compositions in sixteen different Raga-s, starting from sixteen consecutive beats on Trital.
Gopal Shankar also inspired his sister to take up another instrument - jal tarang when she was in school.
Ragini has also been recognized as the first woman player of jal-tarang following Sitar gatkari in her presentation.
At this juncture, his devotion to the Veena intensified.
He had also studied Sanskrit for his M.A. degree.
Teaching at Banaras Hindu University exposed him to many potential learners.
Now, his ability to teach with patience was fully exploited.
His students were not limited to a single instrument.
Kamala Shankar played guitar while Taranga Vilasini sports a santoor.
Students from Korea, Sri Lanka, Canada, France, Germany etc. would come to Varanasi to learn with him.
He was equally at home with theory and demonstration, and would often repeat his fathers advice, Dont discuss, do it.
Completely at home with technology, his visual sensibility were equally strong.
He would capture finger movements and other postures accurately on video, which proved immensely useful to his students.
All his students would record their sessions with him and return only after they had perfected the phrase or melody.
His teaching was effective as it was inspiring.
Many of Gopal Shankars students are now teaching music at various levels.
It was through Gopal Shankar Misra that the vichitra veena finally found wider international fame.
The veena is associated with Saraswati, the Goddess of learning in Hindu mythology.
It evolved from the ancient Ban and later was known as Batta-Been.
Gopal inherited the style known as Misrabani, from his father who had brought the instrument to prominence in Northern Indian music.
Veena as lifeline.
Gopal Shankar Misra was an acclaimed artiste of Sitar who was invited all across Indian and abroad.
But because Vichitra Veena held a special meaning for his father, he could not let it lie silent.
Underneath them are 13 sympathetic strings tuned to the notes of the appropriate raag.
The veena has a five-octave range.
Olive oil or butter is put on the strings to ease the playing action.
Through the efforts of Gopal Shankar Misra, a course of D.Mus.
He had authored the third part of Sangeet-Sarita, a series started by his father for middle-school students.
Adept in the school of Misrabani, he contributed to this true Tantrakari style through performance as well as composition.
A short article, Vichitra Veena : Innovations and Practices outlines his involvement and future plans for making this instrument more approachable.
Jacket note by Alan James, Out of Stillness Real World Compact Disc, April 2000.
Pandit Shankar Ghosh is a noted Indian tabla player from the Farukhabad gharana of Hindustani classical music.
He is also an occasional Hindustani classical singer where he follows the Patiala gharana.
Early life and training.
His other gurus were Pt.
Gyan Prakash Ghosh, Ustad Feroz Khan, Pandit Anath Nath Bose and Pandit Sudarshan Adhikari.
During his stay abroad he also collaborated with artists like Greg Ellis, Pete Lockett and John Bergamo.
He has received awards like ITC Sangeet Research Academy award and the Ustad Hafiz Ali Khan award.
Teaching tabla over three decades, presently he teaches in institutions at Kolkata, Paris and Bonn.
Wood began his career in 1964, when he joined the Birds on guitar.
Wood joined the Jeff Beck Group in 1967, where he played bass.
They released two albums, Truth and Beck-Ola, which became moderate successes.
The group, although relegated to cult status in the US, found great success in the UK and mainland Europe.
The Faces released their debut album, First Step, in 1970.
Their last LP, entitled Ooh La La, was released in 1973.
Richards soon invited Wood to join the Rolling Stones, after the departure of Mick Taylor.
Wood joined in 1975, and has remained a member ever since.
Besides Ive Got My Own Album to Do, Wood has recorded several other solo efforts.
He released Gim me Some Neck in 1979, which hit number 45 in the US.
1234 was released in 1981, peaking at number 164.
He released Slide on This in 1992, Not for Beginners came out in 2002.
and I Feel Like Playing in 2010.
In between Jeff Beck Group projects Wood also worked with the Creation.
Wood also performed with Townshend, Grech, Steve Winwood, Jim Capaldi and Eric Clapton at Claptons Rainbow Concert in 1973.
In December 1973, Wood collaborated with Mick Jagger on the song Its Only Rockn Roll.
NME - August 1976.
The Rolling Stones single Emotional Rescue also features Wood on bass.
In 1975, Wood released his second solo album, Now Look ; his third, Gim me Some Neck, came out in 1979.
At the 1985 Live Aid Concert in Philadelphia, Wood along with Keith Richards performed in the penultimate set with Bob Dylan.
During the performance of Blowin in the Wind, one of Dylans guitar strings broke.
In 1990 Wood was made a fully-fledged partner in the Rolling Stones financial organization.
Bo Diddley and guitar on I Cant Stand It.
Since 2000 Wood has continued to combine solo work with his Rolling Stones schedule.
The band included members of his own family, Slash and Andrea Corr.
After the tour a DVD called Far East Man was released.
In 2005, however, Wood was again busy with the Rolling Stones as they recorded their A Bigger Bang album.
Although only playing on ten of the albums sixteen tracks, Wood embarked on the tour which ran through till August 2007.
Bill Wyman played bass and lead vocals were shared by several performers, notably Mick Hucknall.
Rod Stewart, who had earlier denied rumours of plans for a Faces reunion in 2009, was not present.
On 2 November 2009 Wood was given an Outstanding Contribution award at the Classic Rock Roll of Honour ceremony in London.
Pete Townshend presented the award.
Since 9 April 2010, Wood has presented his own radio show on Absolute Radio.
In May 2011 Ronnie Wood won the Sony Radio Personality of the Year award for The Ronnie Wood Show.
Wood was born in Hillingdon, London, into a family of English water gypsies.
He has said that his generation was the first in the family to be born on dry land.
Both of his older brothers, Art and Ted, were graphic artists as well as musicians.
Ted Wood died in 2004, and Art Wood in 2006.
Wood has four children.
Krissy died in 2005.
Also a former model, Jo Wood has developed a successful line of organic beauty products.
The Woods own homes in Kingston Vale in Greater London and County Kildare, Ireland.
He had plans once again for a seventh admission.
In July 2008 he left his wife for Ekaterina Ivanova, whom he had met in a London club.
Wood checked into rehab again on 16 July 2008.
Jo Wood filed for divorce and was granted a decree nisi in November 2009.
On 3 December 2009, Wood was arrested over assault in connection with a domestic incident.
He was officially cautioned for this offence on 22 December 2009.
On 21 December 2012, Wood married Humphreys.
Wood is a well-known visual artist.
He went on to train at the Ealing Art College, as both his brothers had.
Other notable musicians, Freddie Mercury of Queen, and Pete Townshend of the Who, also attended in the 1960s.
Woods paintings, drawings and prints frequently feature icons of popular culture and have been exhibited all over the world.
He did the cover artwork to Eric Claptons 1988 box set Crossroads.
Several of his paintings, including a work commissioned by Andrew Lloyd Webber, are displayed at Londons Drury Lane Theatre.
Liberty & Co.
has produced a clothing line using fabrics printed with Woods art.
Wood has maintained a long-standing relationship with the San Francisco Art Exchange who first exhibited his work in 1987.
Wood is also the co-owner of a London art gallery called Scream.
Books, films and television appearances.
In October 2007 Wood appeared on the television motor show Top Gear, achieving a celebrity lap time of 1:49.4.
Gurdev Singh is an Indian - born musician based in London who plays the plucked string instrument sarod.
Singh studied under sarod player Amjad Ali Khan, can play the instrument dilruba, and sings Hindustani classical music.
He performed on the 1993 album Fate of Nations by English rock singer Robert Plant.
Singh has played internationally and taught students in England.
Rahim-ud-in Khan Dagar.
Ustad Rahimuddin Khan Dagar was a dhrupad singer from India who was awarded Padma Bhushan in 1969.
Petr Kroutil is a Czech musician and actor.
He is a clarinettist, saxophonist, bansuri player, vocalist, composer and arranger.
Kroutil studied jazz music from a very young age and began playing the recorder at the age of six.
By the age of nine, he had begun studying the clarinet.
Then Kroutil attended the Berklee College of Music in Boston, Massachusetts, until 2003, studying performance and jazz composition.
The band, which concentrated on performing music from the 1930s era, toured Europe and North Africa extensively.
He also recorded and performed the soundtrack for the mini-series.
In 1996, Kroutil co-established the big band The Prague Swing Orchestra, specializing in swing music of the 1940s.
As the lead soloist, singer and emcee for P.S.O, he played at some of the most prestigious jazz festivals in Europe.
In addition, the orchestra has performed many live jazz concerts which were televised and internationally broadcast.
The members of the quintet were the top Czech jazz players.
In 2002, Kroutil released an album Bhakti Junction in London with established singer Renu Gidoomal.
The British-Indian Jazz-Fusion album includes two original compositions by Kroutil.
Kroutil became a member of the Royal Caribbean Cruise Line s orchestra in 2003.
He also established his own band The Mc Twisters, performing his own compositions.
Although the band only survived two years, it became very successful in Nepal and India.
The Mc Twisters were nominated for Nepali Grammys in 2006.
He is also a co-front man for the top Czech jazz singer Jana Koubkova 's band.
Petr 's co-musicians are well known and established colleagues who teach in Prague 's Jazz Conservatory Of Jaroslav Jezek.
In Autumn 2007 Petr permormed with a living legend of Russian rock music - mystical Boris Grebenschicov.
Instead of hard rock music, they performed together tibetians mantras for over 800 thrilled listeners.
For Michal Horacek he recorded all wind instruments for the most selling and successful album of a year - Ohrozeny druh.
In the same time they performed together on Trafalgar Square for over 25000 people with their - Bhajazz concept.
Which was the most ambitious music project ever done in London.
Over 2000 musicians from all around the world was performing on five stages around London just before the Olympic games started.
Petr was chosen as the only one from the Czech republic and he performed with Budapest Bar from Hungary.
The concert itself was broadcast by BBC.
Basis of this article.
Last updated in 2006.
Singh is generally considered involved with an electronica sub genre called Asian Underground, and more recently as Indian and/or Asian electronica.
Singh has since collaborated with a variety of acts including Madonna and Massive Attack.
Early life and career.
Singh grew up in Leytonstone and began playing the tablas as a child.
At the age of 16, Singh went to India for two years where he studied tabla under Pandit Lashman Singh.
He then returned to the UK after just one year.
By the late 1980s, Singh had decided to turn towards the fusion of sounds.
Two years later in 1993, he was recruited by Bjork to be her percussionist and director on her 1993s Debut album.
He worked as a remixer, for Blondie on their Maria single.
In 1998, Singh released his solo debut album, Ok.
The record was critically acclaimed and received the prestigious Mercury Music Prize in 1999.
That same year, he also collaborated with David Sylvian.
In 2000, he worked with Madonna for her album, Music.
Style and influences.
Singh is an accomplished Tabla player, electronic musician, music theorist, record producer and DJ.
In 1990 Singh conceived the Tablatronic, a hybrid electronic/analog tabla which utilizes a rare internal microphone system.
In 2010, Talvin Singh won an award at the UK Asian Music Awards for his Commitment to Scene.
George Harrison, was an English musician, singer and songwriter who achieved international fame as the lead guitarist of the Beatles.
After the bands break-up in 1970, Harrison released the triple album All Things Must Pass, from which two hit singles originated.
He also organized the 1971 Concert for Bangladesh with Ravi Shankar, a precursor for later benefit concerts such as Live Aid.
Harrison released several best-selling singles and albums as a solo performer, and in 1988 co-founded the platinum-selling supergroup the Traveling Wilburys.
Rolling Stone magazine ranked him number 11 in their list of the 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time.
Harrisons first marriage, to Pattie Boyd, ended in divorce in 1977.
The following year he married Olivia Trinidad Arias, with whom he had one son, Dhani.
Harrison died in 2001, aged 58, from lung cancer.
He left almost PS100 million in his will.
1943-57 : early years.
He had one sister, Louise, and two brothers, Harry and Peter.
His future wife, the model Pattie Boyd, described Harrisons parents as quite short and very Liverpudlian.
While pregnant with George, she often listened to the weekly broadcast Radio India.
The home had an outdoor toilet and its only heat came from a single coal fire.
In 1949 the family was offered a council house and moved to 25 Upton Green, Speke.
In 1948, at the age of five, Harrison enrolled at Dovedale Primary School.
He passed his 11-plus examination and attended the prestigious Liverpool Institute from 1954 to 1959.
Harrisons earliest musical influences included George Formby, Cab Calloway, Django Reinhardt, Hoagy Carmichael, and Big Bill Broonzy.
1958-70 : the Beatles.
The bands first residency in Hamburg ended prematurely when Harrison was deported for being too young to work in nightclubs.
When Brian Epstein became their manager in December 1961, he polished their image and secured them a recording contract with EMI.
Their second album, With the Beatles, included Dont Bother Me, Harrisons first solo writing credit.
He later called Rubber Soul his favourite album.
Revolver included three of his compositions : Taxman, Love You To and I Want to Tell You.
His introduction of the drone-like tambura part on Lennons Tomorrow Never Knows exemplified the bands ongoing exploration of non-Western instruments.
The tabla - driven Love You To was the Beatles first genuine foray into Indian music.
Harrison continued to develop his interest in non-Western instrumentation, playing swarmandal on Strawberry Fields Forever.
His sole composition on the album was the Indian-inspired Within You Without You, to which no other Beatle contributed.
Released as the B-side to McCartneys Lady Madonna, it was the first Harrison composition to appear on a Beatles single.
Dylan and the Band were a major musical influence on Harrison at the end of his career with the Beatles.
This coincided with a prolific period in his songwriting and his growing desire to assert his independence from the band.
During the recording of The Beatles in 1968, tensions ran high, and drummer Ringo Starr quit briefly.
Relations among the Beatles were more cordial, though still strained, during sessions for their final recorded album, Abbey Road.
In 1969 Frank Sinatra recorded Something, and later dubbed it the greatest love song of the past fifty years.
Lennon considered it the best song on Abbey Road, and it became the Beatles second most covered song after Yesterday.
1968-87 : solo career.
Early solo work.
In December 1969 Harrison participated in a brief tour of Europe with the American group Delaney & Bonnie and Friends.
Delaney Bramlett inspired Harrison to learn slide guitar, significantly influencing his later music.
All Things Must Pass.
After years of being restricted in his songwriting contributions to the Beatles albums, Harrison released All Things Must Pass.
It was a triple album, with two discs of his songs and the third of recordings of Harrison jamming with friends.
Regarded by many as his best work, the album topped the charts on both sides of the Atlantic.
The LP produced the number-one hit single My Sweet Lord and the top-ten single What Is Life.
In fact, I dont use reverb at all.
The Concert for Bangladesh.
The goal of the event was to raise money to aid starving refugees during the Bangladesh Liberation War.
Shankar opened the show, which featured popular musicians such as Dylan, Clapton, Leon Russell, Badfinger, Preston and Starr.
A triple album, The Concert for Bangladesh, was released by Apple Corps that year, followed by a concert film in 1972.
The main thing was, we spread the word and helped get the war ended.
The event has been described as an innovative precursor for the large-scale charity rock shows that followed, including Live Aid.
Living in the Material World to George Harrison.
In the UK, the LP achieved number two, spending 12 weeks on the charts with the single peaking at number 8.
The album was lavishly produced and packaged, and its dominant message was Harrisons Hindu beliefs.
In Greenes opinion it contained many of the strongest compositions of his career.
Other reviewers were less enthusiastic, describing the release as awkward, sanctimonious and overly sentimental, a reaction that left Harrison despondent.
In November 1974 Harrison began his 45-date Dark Horse Tour, becoming the first ex-Beatle to tour North America.
Further, he reworked the lyrics to several Beatles songs, and some of the substitutions were seen as gratuitously offensive.
His laryngitis - affected vocals also disappointed fans and critics, who began calling the tour dark hoarse.
Harrison was so deeply bothered by the caustic backlash that he did not tour again until the 1990s.
They went away ecstatic, conscious that they had just witnessed something so uplifting that it could never be repeated.
Leng called the tour groundbreaking and revolutionary in its presentation of Indian Music.
In December Harrison released Dark Horse, an album that earned him the least favourable reviews of his career.
Harrisons final studio album for EMI and Apple Records was the soul music - inspired Extra Texture.
He considered it the least satisfactory of the three he had recorded since All Things Must Pass.
In 1979, following his second marriage and the birth of his son Dhani, he released George Harrison.
The album and the single Blow Away both made the Billboard top 20.
Somewhere in England to Cloud Nine.
The murder of Lennon on 8 December 1980 disturbed Harrison and reinforced his decades-long concerns about stalkers.
I am shocked and stunned.
Harrison modified the lyrics of a song he had written for Starr to make it a tribute song to Lennon.
The single was included on the album Somewhere in England in 1981.
During this period he made several guest appearances, including a 1985 performance at a tribute to Carl Perkins titled.
In November 1987 Harrison released the platinum album Cloud Nine.
1988-2001 : later life.
The Traveling Wilburys.
In 1988 Harrison formed the Traveling Wilburys with Jeff Lynne, Roy Orbison, Bob Dylan and Tom Petty.
The band had gathered in Dylans garage to record a song for a Harrison European single release.
The LP, Traveling Wilburys Vol.
1, was released in October 1988 and recorded under pseudonyms as half-brothers, supposed sons of Charles Truscott Wilbury, Sr.
Harrisons pseudonym on the first album was Nelson Wilbury ; he used the name Spike Wilbury for their second album.
After Orbisons death in December 1988 the group recorded as a four-piece.
Their second release, issued in October 1990, was mischievously titled Traveling Wilburys Vol.
According to Lynne, That was Georges idea.
He said, Lets confuse the buggers.
It reached number 14 in the UK, where it went platinum with certified sales of more than 3,000,000 units.
The Wilburys never performed live and the group did not record together again following the release of their second album.
In 1989 Harrison and Starr appeared in the music video for Tom Pettys song I Wont Back Down.
In December 1991, Harrison joined Clapton for a tour of Japan.
It was Harrisons first since 1974 and no others followed.
The Beatles Anthology.
In 1994 Harrison began a collaboration with McCartney, Starr and producer Jeff Lynne for the Beatles Anthology project.
Released in December 1995, Free as a Bird was the first new Beatles single since 1970.
In March 1996, they released a second single, Real Love.
Harrison refused to participate in the completion of a third song.
Following the Anthology project, Harrison collaborated with Ravi Shankar on the latters Chants of India.
Harrisons final television appearance was a VH-1 special to promote the album, taped in May 1997.
Soon after, he was diagnosed with throat cancer, and treated with radiotherapy, which was thought at the time to be successful.
In January 1998, Harrison attended Carl Perkinss funeral in Jackson, Tennessee, performing a brief rendition of Perkinss song Your True Love.
Knife attack and illness.
Following the attack, Harrison was hospitalized with more than forty stab wounds.
When the news was publicized, Harrison bemoaned his physicians breach of privacy, and his estate later claimed damages.
On 12 November, the three living former Beatles met for the last time at Harrisons hotel in New York for lunch.
Harrison died on 29 November 2001, aged 58, from metastatic non-small cell lung cancer.
He left almost PS100 million in his will.
His final album, the posthumously released Brainwashed, was completed by his son Dhani and Jeff Lynne.
Nor will there be any future when we shall cease to be.
The single Any Road, released in May 2003, reached number 37 on the UK Singles Chart.
Dont Bother Me appeared on the bands second album, With the Beatles, later that year, then on Meet the Beatles !.
in the US in early 1964.
In 1965, he contributed I Need You and You Like Me Too Much to the album Help !.
In 1969, McCartney told Lennon : Until this year, our songs have been better than Georges.
Now this year his songs are at least as good as ours.
Harrison often had difficulty getting the band to record his songs.
Lennon called the song one of Harrisons best : His mind and his music are clear.
There is his innate talent, he brought that sound together.
Inglis considered Abbey Road a turning point in Harrisons development as a songwriter and musician.
He described Harrisons contributions to the LP as exquisite, declaring them equal to any previous Beatles songs.
His interest in Indian music proved a strong influence on his songwriting and contributed to his innovation within the Beatles.
According to Rolling Stone, Harrisons openness to new sounds and textures cleared new paths for his rock and roll compositions.
He played exquisitely in the service of the song.
He identified Chuck Berry as an early influence and Ry Cooder as an important later influence.
Another of Harrisons musical techniques was the use of guitar lines written in octaves, as on Ill Be on My Way.
Of Rubber Souls If I Needed Someone, Harrison said : its like a million other songs written around the D chord.
In 1966 Harrison contributed innovative musical ideas to Revolver.
Everett described Harrisons guitar solo from Old Brown Shoe as stinging highly Claptonesque.
In Greenes opinion, Harrisons demo for the song contains one of the most complex lead guitar solos on any Beatles song.
Harrisons playing on Abbey Road, and in particular on Something, marked a significant moment in his development as a guitarist.
Harrison received an Ivor Novello award in July 1970 for Something, as The Best Song Musically and Lyrically of the Year.
Leng described Harrisons slide guitar solo on Lennons How Do You Sleep ?.
as a departure for the sweet soloist of Something, calling his playing rightly famed ... one of Harrisons greatest guitar statements.
Lennon commented : Thats the best hes ever fucking played in his life.
He performed at a Formby convention in 1991, and served as the honorary president of the George Formby Appreciation Society.
He also played bass on several solo recordings, including Faster, Wake Up My Love and Bye Bye Love.
His first solid-body electric guitar was a Czech-built Jolana Futurama/Grazioso.
Harrison obtained his first Fender Stratocaster in 1965 and used it in recording Rubber Soul, notably on the song Nowhere Man.
In early 1966 Harrison, Lennon, and McCartney each purchased Epiphone Casinos, which they used on Revolver.
Harrison also used a Gibson J-160E and a Gibson SG Standard while recording the album.
He played this guitar in the Magical Mystery Tour film and throughout his solo career.
In mid-1968 he acquired a Gibson Les Paul that he nicknamed Lucy.
Around this time, he obtained a Gibson Jumbo J-200, which he used for early demos of While My Guitar Gently Weeps.
Harrison co-wrote the song Badge with Clapton, which was included on Cream s 1969 album, Goodbye.
Harrison played rhythm guitar on the track, using the pseudonym LAngelo Misterioso for contractual reasons.
In May 1970 he played guitar on several songs during a recording session for Dylans album New Morning.
In 1971 he played electric slide guitar on How Do You Sleep ?.
and a dobro on Crippled Inside, both from Lennons Imagine album.
He worked with Harry Nilsson on Youre Breakin My Heart and with Cheech & Chong on Basketball Jones.
In 1973 he produced and made a guest appearance on the album Shankar Family & Friends.
In 1974 Harrison founded Dark Horse Records.
He wanted Dark Horse to serve as a creative outlet for artists, as Apple Records had for the Beatles.
Harrison explained : Most of the stuff will be what I produce.
Other artists signed by Dark Horse include Attitudes, Henry McCullough, Jiva, and Stairsteps.
It appeared on Jools Holland s album Small World, Big Band.
Sitar and Indian music.
Harrison became fascinated with the sitar and immersed himself in Indian music.
Lavezzoli described Harrison as the man most responsible for this phenomenon.
On 6 July, Harrison travelled to India to buy a sitar from Rikhi Ram & Sons in New Delhi.
In September, he returned to India to study sitar with Shankar.
He initially stayed in Bombay, then moved to a houseboat on a remote lake where Shankar taught him for six weeks.
After Shankar, he received tutelage from Shambhu Das.
By the mid-1960s Harrison had become an admirer of Indian culture and mysticism, introducing it to the other Beatles.
During the filming of Help !.
In 1968 he travelled to Rishikesh in northern India with the other Beatles to study meditation with Maharishi Mahesh Yogi.
Harrisons use of psychedelic drugs encouraged his path to meditation and Hinduism.
He commented : For me, it was like a flash.
Harrison became a vegetarian in the late 1960s, and a devotee of the Indian mystic Paramahansa Yogananda.
In mid-1969, he produced the single Hare Krishna Mantra, performed by members of the London Radha Krishna Temple.
Soon after, Harrison embraced the Hare Krishna tradition, particularly japa-yoga chanting with beads, and became a lifelong devotee.
He respected people of other faiths and once remarked : All religions are branches of one big tree.
It doesnt matter what you call Him just as long as you call.
He commented on his beliefs :.
Family and interests.
Harrison married the model Pattie Boyd on 21 January 1966, with McCartney as best man.
They separated in 1974 and their divorce was finalized in 1977.
She subsequently moved in with Clapton, and they married in 1979.
Harrison married Dark Horse Records secretary Olivia Trinidad Arias on 2 September 1978.
He employed ten workers to maintain the garden.
His autobiography, I, Me, Mine, is dedicated to gardeners everywhere.
He wrote Faster as a tribute to the Formula One racing drivers Jackie Stewart and Ronnie Peterson.
Harrisons first extravagant car, a 1964 Aston Martin DB5, was sold at auction on 7 December 2011 in London.
An anonymous Beatles collector paid PS350 ,000 for the vehicle that Harrison had bought new in January 1965.
Relationships with the other Beatles.
For most of the Beatles career the relationships in the group were close.
According to Hunter Davies, the Beatles spent their lives not living a communal life, but communally living the same life.
They were each others greatest friends.
Nobody, not even the wives, can break through or even comprehend it.
Starr said, We really looked out for each other and we had so many laughs together.
Just four guys who loved each other.
It was pretty sensational.
The two later bonded over their LSD experiences, finding common ground as seekers of spirituality.
But at the same time, hes such a bastard - but thats the great thing about him, you see ?.
McCartney stated that he and Harrison usually shared a bedroom while touring.
McCartney was best man at Harrisons wedding in 1966, and was the only Beatle in attendance.
McCartney has referred to Harrison as his baby brother.
In a 1974 BBC radio interview with Alan Freeman, Harrison stated : ruined me as a guitar player.
Rodriguez commented : even to the end of Georges days, theirs was a volatile relationship.
Harrison was involved in humanitarian and political activism throughout his life.
In the 1960s, the Beatles supported the civil rights movement and protested against the Vietnam War.
Shankar then asked for Harrisons advice about planning a small charity event in the US.
Harrison responded by organizing the Concert for Bangladesh, which raised more than $ 240,000.
In December 2007, they donated $ 450,000 to help the victims of Cyclone Sidr in Bangladesh.
In 1973 Peter Sellers introduced Harrison to Denis OBrien.
Soon after, the two went into business together.
Harrison explained : The name of the company came about as a bit of a joke.
Their opportunity for investment came after EMI Films withdrew funding at the demand of their Chief Executive, Bernard Delfont.
The film grossed $ 21 million at the box office in the US.
The film featured a new song by Harrison, Dream Away, in the closing credits.
Harrison served as executive producer for 23 films with HandMade, including Mona Lisa, Shanghai Surprise and Withnail and I.
In 1965 Harrison and the other Beatles were appointed Members of the Order of the British Empire.
They received their insignia from the Queen at an investiture at Buckingham Palace on 26 October.
In 1971 the Beatles received an Academy Award for the best Original Song Score for the film Let It Be.
The minor planet 4149 Harrison, discovered in 1984, was named after him.
Rolling Stone magazine ranked him number 11 in their list of the 100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time.
In 2002, on the first anniversary of his death, the Concert for George was held at the Royal Albert Hall.
Clapton organized the event, which included performances by many of Harrisons friends and musical collaborators, including McCartney and Starr.
The profits from the concert went to Harrisons charity, the Material World Charitable Foundation.
McCartney, Lynne and Petty were present when the star was unveiled.
The documentary film, , was directed by Martin Scorsese and released in October 2011.
The film features interviews with Olivia and Dhani Harrison, Klaus Voormann, Terry Gilliam, Starr, Clapton, McCartney, Jim Keltner and Astrid Kirchherr.
Dr. Sangeeta Shankar is an Indian violinist who performs Hindustani classical music.
Sangeeta Shankar, was born in Banaras in a musical family to N. Rajam and T. S. Subramaniyan.
Sangeeta started her training at the age of four in Hindustani music under the unparalleled tutelage of her mother.
People often refer to her music as the Singing Violin.
She is the niece of T. N. Krishnan.
She first started performing on television when she was 8 years old, and her career has been forging ahead ever since.
Her performance was much appreciated, and it wasnt long before she made a mark in the Indian classical music industry.
Dr. Sangeeta Shankar had also organized a festival of young musicians in Varanasi called Abhinav, during the year 1984-85.
She performs not only in various states and provinces of India, but also in numerous countries around the globe.
She plays violin in the Gayaki Ang.
Sangeeta has performed across the globe and in numerous places throughout India.
She also conceived and created a TV serial of 26 episodes, named Swar Sadhana in the year 2000.
This serial was made for creating an awareness of Indian classical music among the masses.
Currently, she is also educating the future film makers, imparting voice culture & music training at Whistling Woods International.
She currently resides in Mumbai.
Malini Rajurkar is a noted Hindustani classical singer of Gwalior Gharana.
She grew up in the state of Rajasthan in India.
Malini has performed in major music festivals in India, including Gunidas Sammelan, Tansen Samaroh, Sawai Gandharva Festival, and Shankar Lal Festival.
Malini is noted especially for her command over the Tappa genre.
She has also sung lighter music.
Her renditions of two Marathi natyageete, pandu-nrupati janak jaya and naravar krishnasamaan, have been particularly popular.
Dhondutai Kulkarni, is perhaps the last living icon of the Jaipur-Atrauli Gharana.
Dhondutai, popularly known as Gaan-Yogini, was born in a Brahmin family in Kolhapur, Maharashtra.
Dhondutais father initiated her into music.
From him she became an AIR performing artiste at the age of eight.
Her training continued under the mentorship of Laxmibai Jadhav and Ustad Azizuddin Khan, grandson of the legendary Alladiya Khan.
Azizuddin Khan she received most of her repertoire of rare Ragas.
Her incredible repertoire of ragas sees to it that she rarely repeats a raga at two consecutive concerts.
Dhondutai knows specialty Raag creations made not just by Alladiya Khan but also Kesarbai Kerkar.
At age 86, Dhondutai is saluted not just for her musical contributions, but also for her quality as a performing artist.
Awards and recognition.
Dhondutai has been awarded the Sangeet Natak Akademi Award in 1990.
She also has been invited to the Surashri Kesarbai Kerkar Sangeet Sammelan since its beginnings, she sings last at the concert.
Namita Devidayals book The Music Room chronicles a significant part of Dhondutais life, music and career.
Namita is one of Dhondutais students and learned from her over a period of 25 years.
The book talks about the life and music of Alladiya Khan, Kesarbai Kerkar and Dhondutai.
Pandit Nayan Ghosh is an Indian tabla and sitar player.
Nayans first solo was broadcast at the age of 4, in 1960.
He started performing at international music festivals and universities at the age of 18, in 1974.
Nayan is presently Director of the Sangeet Mahabharati music academy in Mumbai, and is also a Distinguished Guest Professor at IIT-Bombay.
The samavadi is the second-most prominent note of a raga in Indian classical music.
A samvadi is a note of special significance.
A performer will typically try to emphasize the samvadi along with the vadi when improvising on a certain raga.
Geeta Javdekar is a Hindustani classical vocalist belonging to the Jaipur-Atrauli gharana.
Born in Dharwad, Karnataka, she is a resident of Mumbai, India.
Geeta is the daughter of Narasimha M. Joshi and Smt.
Geetas maternal house is situated in Mangalwar Peth, Dharwad, the cultural capital of Karnataka.
She stood first in the B.A. examination of Karnataka University with a record number of marks at the time.
Academically, she furthered her career with M.A. in English Literature.
Geeta continued her tutelage under several maestros : Pt.
Padmavati Shaligram and Pt.
Ratnakar Pai and also received guidance from Padma Vibhushan Pandit Mallikarjun Mansoor.
In February 2008, Smt.
Geeta Javadekar was awarded the Vardharaj Adya Memorial Award, instituted by Karnataka Sangha in Mumbai.
Kris Chetan Ramlu.
Kris Chetan Ramlu, is a New Zealand musician, sometimes known by the stage name Cheats.
Though his main instrument is the tabla, Chetan plays many other percussion instruments.
His biggest musical influence is Ustad Zakir Hussain, a virtuoso percussionist whose name is synonymous with the tabla.
Chetan plays Vhatkar Tabla and Meinl Percussion.
He has also trained in the art of Indian classical singing with Sumeet Tappoo and briefly with Pandit Vithal Rao.
Chetan is currently working with Moksha an Indian fusion band.
Pandit Amar Nath was an Indian classical vocalist.
He was the first and closest disciple of Ustad Amir Khan.
Amar Nath was born in 1924 in Jhang in Punjab, now in Pakistan.
He learned music from B.N. Datta of Lahore from 1942 to 1947.
He moved to Delhi after the partition of India.
After several failed attempts, he convinced Amir Khan to accept him as a disciple.
Shanno Khurana is a noted Indian classical vocalist and composer, from the Rampur-Sahaswan gharana of Hindustani classical music.
She also pursued music education, finally earning her M. Phil.
and PhD in music from the Kairagarh University, and has undertakes extensive research on folk music of Rajasthan.
Early life and training.
Khurana was born and brought in a Punjabi family in Jodhpur, Rajasthan.
Hers was a family on non-musicians, of doctors, engineers, and people working in foreign services.
For the next three years, travelled back and forth from Delhi, but managed to complete her education.
After his untimely death in 1964, she continued her training under his son, the Ustad Ishtiaq Hussain Khan.
In 2006, her music album of genre of tappas, titled Sufi Raah was released by Parzor Foundation.
and was later made a board member of the Sangeet Natak Akademi.
Abhijit Banerjee is a leading tabla player in India.
Early life and background.
He started learning Tabla at the age of four.
He received his first instruction from Tushar Kanti Bose and later from Manik Pal.
He is a leading disciple of Pt.
Jnan Prakash Ghosh, a doyen of Indian Classical Music.
Abhijit also learned vocal from Pandit Ajoy Chakrabarty and violin from Guru Ma Annapurna Devi.
He has accompanied maestros such as Pt.
Ravi Shankar, late Pt.
Nikhil Banerjee, Begum Parveen Sultana, Pt.
Jasraj, Pt Shiv Kumar Sharma, Dr. Balamurali Krishnan.
Abhijit has established himself as major solo tabla player and has performed in major festivals in India.
Abijit has toured extensively in USA, Canada, U.K., Europe, Japan, Australia, South Africa, South East Asia and Mexico.
Abhijit has collaborated in the world crossover music.
Released Cd with Ry Cooder.
He has participated in Womad Festival with Trilok Gurtu.
His other main CDs include Peshkash, , TARANG, Hollow bamboo, Teentaal, True rhythms of India.
He has his own touring ensemble named Tarang and he is also member of Raga Jazz group, Arohi Ensemble.
He has founded the Dhwani Academy of Percussion Music.
This is mainly a percussion academy inclined to teach Tabla along with other Indian percussion instruments like Pakhwaj, Ghatam, etc.
Dhwani is in India and also in Los Angeles and New York.
India academy was established in 2001 and Los Angeles academy was established in 2004.
New York was established in 2006.
and had sex.
Other than teaching and research, the academy in India gives free teaching to visually challenged students for last 10 years.
www.dhwaniacademy.net Through this school he conducts workshops and classes all over the world.
Abhijit has produced The Drance Drama of TAGORE Chitrangada in Balinese way.
The production is a dance drama with Indian Dance and Balinese dancers.
The music is a unique fusion of balinese music and Indian Music.
He was in Bali as an Apex fellow from UCLA and interacted with Balinese musicians like Dewa Brata and Cudamani group.
He is a graduate in English literature and post graduate in Journalism.
Abhijit banerjee has scored music for the whittier college production Ephigenia and sisters.
a Live drama series of five days.
Abhijit is working with Kenny Endo and Jhn Santos with the project Uncommon times.
A project of Tabla, Timbales and Taiko.
His work and association with Kenny is not new.
They have worked in his own project TARANG and in Appex.
This unique project Uncommon Times is being performed in many places.
He gave a theme lecture on the beginning of the seminar along with dignitaries like Dr. Karan Sing, Pt.
Vijay Kichlu, Prof. Amlan Dasgupta were present.
Abhijit was invited by Jadavpur University, KOlkata on 15 January to deliver lecture on traditionalism in Music.
Interview with Abhijit Banerjee published in Slovak magazine Novy Popular.
Keshav Ginde is an Indian classical flutist.
Ginde was born in Belgaum, Karnataka.
He comes from a musical family and started his musical training at the age of six.
He has won awards and performed on All India Radio and Doordarshan for four decades.
This special flute is 42 inches long and has been kept in the Archives of the Sangeet Natak Akademi in Delhi.
The flute has also been recognized by the Limca Book of Records as the only flute that can produce 3.5 octaves.
Ginde sir created Raga AnandSagar.
And his disciple Azaruddin developed flute which can be played in the Laraj saptak he named it as Anahat Venu.
So Who Am I.
So Who Am I is the fourth album by British bhangra group Swami.
Also, some of the songs on DesiRock featured MC Sarpanch, who was removed from the band in between these two albums.
Therefore, all his vocals have been re-recorded by S-Endz on this release.
This album also contains a new track - DesiRock Part II.
It was released on Sony BMG in 2005.
Adil Hussaini is a Sufi singer.
Adil Hussaini trained under legendary singer, Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan.
He performed at South Asia Inter-fath Harmony Conclave held in New Delhi in April 2007.
During his lifetime, he composed several ragas and laid the foundation of a modern Maihar gharana.
Amongst his recordings which are rare, the most important ones are those he recorded with the All India Radio in 1959-60.
Early life and background.
Allauddin Khan was born in Shibpur village in Brahmanbaria District, the son of Sabdar Hossain Khan, also known as Sadhu Khan.
Allauddins elder brother, Fakir Aftabuddin, first taught him the basics of music at home.
At the age of ten, Allauddin ran away from home to join a jatra band, a traditional Bengali form of theater.
This experience exposed him to the rich folk tradition of Bengal.
After some time, he went to Kolkata, and was accepted as a student by singer Gopal Krishna Bhattacharya, alias Nulo Gopal.
Allauddin committed to a 12-year practice program ; However, Nulo Gopal died of plague after the seventh year.
At this time, he also took lessons in European classical violin from Lobo, a bandmaster from Goa.
Alauddin became his student, and studied the sarod under him for five years.
Through him, Alauddin was given access to the Senia gharana.
He later became the court musician of Brijnath Singh Maharaja of Maihar Estate in Central Province.
During his time as a court musician, Khan completely reshaped the Maihar gharana of Indian classical music.
For though he gave concerts on the sarod, Allauddin played many instruments, something that shaped his pedagogy.
Baijnath Singh was first and Vasant Rai was Allauddin Khans last student.
Allauddin stayed at Maihar from 1918 to his death.
In 1955, he established a Maihar College of Music.
Anecdotes about Khan range from throwing a Tabla tuning hammer at the Maharaja himself to taking care of disabled beggars.
A few years before the turn of the century, he married Madanmanjari Devi.
Annapurna learned classical vocal music, Sitar, and Surbahar from her father.
She later married and divorced Ravi Shankar.
Ragas created by Allauddin Khan.
Many of these have not become common Maihar repertoire ; Manjh Khamaj is perhaps the best known.
Devaki Pandit is an Indian playback singer.
She is also a trained classical singer.
Devaki Pandit was born in Maharashtra, India to Usha Pandit.
She was introduced to music at the age of two, and is a third generation musician from the Pandit household.
She received her initial music training from her mother Usha Pandit.
She trained under Vasantrao Kulkarni for 10 years, Jitendra Abhisheki for twelve years and from Kishori Amonkar for four years.
Since 2003, she is training under Babanrao Haldankar.
Devaki Pandit gave her to her first stage performance at age nine.
In 1977, at the age of twelve she recorded her first song - a balgeet for Polydor Records.
She is well known for her several Marathi serial title songs especially Abhalmaya of Zee Marathi.
Besides Marathi, she has also sung songs in Hindi.
In Spandan she has given her voice to the songs Chal chaal chaal tu bala and Ya Jagnyacha.
The song Chal chaal chaal tu bala features more than 50 cerebral palsy kids.
Tana Riri has been composed by Devaki Pandit.
Devaki Pandit composed Shreeramraksha Stotram, Aradhana Mahakali & Ganaadheesh.
She sung the Ram Raksha Stotra in 32 different Hindustani Classical Raagas.
Adana is an Indian raga.
It is also called Adana kanada.
The flow of this raga is similar to a mix of Madhyamad Saranga with Darbari.
Another common vivadi some artists use sparingly is shuddha ni which enhances the Saranga mood of the raga.
Aroha and avaroha.
S R M P n P M P n S is quite small.
S R g M P n P S. S d n P g M R s. Organization and relationships.
In fact it is omitted by some musicians completely.
Most movements are in the upper tetrachord, around high Sa.
It is very common to begin the elaboration of this raga with high Sa.
Adana was previous called Addana.
Adana was a major raga in the 17th century and a combination of the then current ragas Malhar and Kanada.
His Adana was quite different from the raga as it is performed today.
entries due to :.
Sham Chaurasia gharana.
The gharana is believed to have been founded in the 16th century by.
Mian Chand Khan and Mian Suraj Khan who were contemporaries of Mian Tansen at the court of Mughal emperor Akbar.
Successive generations of musicians in the gharana specialised in the dhrupad form of.
singing and evolved a tradition of duet vocal jugalbandi performances.
Mian Karim Bukhsh Majzoob, Ustad Ahmed Ali Khan, Ustad.
Niaz Hussain Shami, and Ustad Vilayat Ali Khan were.
some of the illustrious members of the Sham Chaurasi gharana.
According to one legend, the founders were given a parcel of land here as a grant to them by Akbar.
His sons, Nazakat and Salamat, were to become particularly well known for their duet singing.
Nazakat and Salamat Ali Khan.
Salamat showed an early genius for music, and apparently they performed on radio in 1942, when Salamat was only 8.
At the age of 11 he travelled with Nazakat to Amritsar for a memorable concert :.
After the partition, the family moved to Lahore and emerged as one of the leading performers of Classical music in Pakistan.
Hameed Naseem of Radio Pakistan once remarked about them : Tansen issi tarah gata ho ga !.
A number of their recordings exist from their very fruitful partnership.
Subsequently, they broke up, and Nazakat was to die shortly, but Salamat Ali Khan continued singing along with his sons.
Sharafat Ali Khan and Shafqat Ali Khan, who continue the Sham Chaurasia tradition today.
Saadat Awan is a Washington DC native, by way of Pakistan and Afghanistan.
He is a member of The Cassettes, Metropolitan band, and Thievery Corporation side projects International Velvet and I.C.U.
Awan is a self-taught drummer, bassist, guitarist, keyboardist, and tabla player.
He has been exploring his roots in his work with The Cassettes, as well as in Metropolitan band.
Recently Awan recorded with The Torches who feature Stephen Guidry from The Cassettes on Banjo and Vocals.
The Band is also scheduled to go back into the studio in the Fall of 2011 for their fifth effort.
Saadat Awan is also a Bhangra DJ with the alias : Beta-G.
Barkat Ali Khan.
Barkat Ali Khan was born in Kasur, then in the Punjab province in British India.
He had his initial training from his father Ali Baksh Khan and later by Bade Ghulam Ali Khan.
After partition, Barkat Ali Khan migrated to Pakistan and concentrated on the lighter aspects of Hindustani classical.
He taught noted ghazal singer Ghulam Ali.
He died a premature death at the age of 57.
Baiju Bawra or Baijnath Prasad or Baijnath Mishra was an Indian dhrupad singer.
He was the court musician of Raja Mansingh Tomar of Gwalher, now Gwalior, along with Nayak Charju, Bakshu, Tansen and others.
Much of the information on Baiju Bawra is legendary and not historically verifiable.
Bawra was born in Chanderi on Sharad Purnima in the month of Ashwini in 1599 according to Vikram Samvat calendar.
He was called Bawra because he was insanely in love with Kalavati dancer in Chanderi.
Baiju learnt Dhrupad music by Guru HariDas Goswami in Vrindavan.
Bawra was a musician at the court of the Raja of Chanderi.
Later, he became a musician at the court of Raja Mansingh of Gwalher.
Sultan Bahadur Shah of Gujarat had also patronized Baiju.
Like Tansen, the musician at the court of Mughal Emperor Akbar, Bawra was a disciple of Swami Haridas.
Tansen then touched Baijus feet and asked for his own life.
In response, kind-hearted Baiju went back to Gwalior.
In popular culture.
Baiju Bawra, a Hindi - language film was made on him in 1952.
In the movie, Baiju is a musician who believes that Tansen is responsible for his fathers death.
He attempts to avenge his fathers death by challenging Tansen to a musical duel and is successful in defeating him.
Geet Ramayan is a collection of 56 Marathi language songs chronologically describing events from the Indian Hindu epic, the Ramayana.
It was broadcast by All India Radio, Pune in 1955-1956, four years before television was introduced in India.
It is considered a milestone of Marathi light music and the most popular Marathi version of Ramayana.
The programs first song Kusa Lava Ramayan Gati was aired on 1 April 1955.
The Geet Ramayan is considered as the crescendo of Madgulkars literary vigour.
Phadke mainly used ragas of Hindustani classical music to compose the songs.
The poet and composer were praised for their contribution to the series.
The series showcased a total of 32 various characters from Ramayana.
Rama being the lead character of the series was given maximum number of songs, followed by eight songs for Sita.
Madgulkar expressed their various moods, ranging from their divinity to the human weaknesses.
Incidentally, the central antagonist of the Ramayana and Geet Ramayan, the demon-king Ravana, was not given any song.
It has also been transliterated into Braille.
Geet Ramayan was conceptualized in 1955, four years before the introduction of television in India in 1959.
He hence outlined his plan to poet and writer G. D. Madgulkar.
Since the Ramayana is an Indian epic, Lad and Madgulkar came up with an idea of a version in singable verse.
Madgulkar accepted the challenge, enlisting his music-director friend Sudhir Phadke for the collaboration.
The team of Madgulkar and Phadke would present a new song every week for a year.
Apart from the number of songs, Madgulkar and Phadke left music, lyrics and choice of singers ad libitum.
The programs first song Kusa Lava Ramayan Gati was aired on 1 April 1955 at 8:45 am IST.
Madgulkar then rewrote the lyrics from memory in fifteen minutes so Phadke could compose the music.
Though Valmiki was the main inspiration for the Geet Ramayan, Madgulkar chose a different narrative format.
He used a simple lyrical format with a flexible number of stanzas.
The metre used was similar to Bhavageete, with roughly the same number of matras in each line.
The metre was also suited to the narration and the characters who sang the song.
Madgulkar used various formats, including narrative, descriptive and communal songs.
However, he chose not to include the last episode of Sitas final confrontation in Ramas court and her entering the earth.
Evidently, this also completes the cycle of songs where it had begun, with Lava and Kusha singing in Ramas court.
He composed songs on all seven chapters or Kanda of Ramayana.
Music and singing.
Musical director Sudhir Phadke composed the songs based on the ragas of Hindustani classical music, including Bhopali, Bhimpalasi and Madhuvanti.
The raga and Tala of a song was selected to suit the time of the incident and the narrative mood.
Phadke voiced all the songs for Rama, and well-known Kirana gharana singer Manik Varma voiced the character of Sita.
A total of 32 characters from the Ramayana were voiced in the Geet Ramayan.
Nishadraj Guha and the boatmen who helped Rama in crossing the Ganges river expressed themselves in Nakos Nauke Parat Phiru.
Madgulkar voiced Ramas personal ethical dilemmas along with his courage, and steadfastness.
Madgulkar is said to have successfully shown Ramas divinity alongside his human weaknesses.
He was shown to be distracted at the loss Sita, and wailed in Lakshmanas presence.
After Geet Ramayans original broadcast was over in March of 1956, requests of re-broadcast were flooding the radio station.
All-India Radio repeated the entire series of fifty-six weekly songs due to popular demand.
After the broadcast, Phadke produced public concerts of selected songs.
The first public performance was held in the Madgulkars bungalow, Panchavati at Wakdewadi, Pune on 28 May 1958.
In 1979, a Silver Jubilee celebration of the programme took place at the New English School in Pune for eight nights.
Vajpayee also attended the Golden Jubilee celebration with Sharad Pawar and Bal Thackeray.
National Award-winning art director Nitin Chandrakant Desai designed the stage depicting scenes from the Ramayana.
As the radio programme became popular, daily newspapers in Pune began printing the lyrics of the new songs each week.
The publication department of All India Radio also compiled the lyrics and excerpts from the introductory comments in a book form.
The 179-page volume, then priced at 2, was launched on 3 October 1957 on the occasion of Vijayadashami.
In 1965, the HMV released ten LPs featuring the voice of Sudhir Phadke.
He has also written a book, Geet Ramayanache Ramayan, describing the making of the radio programme.
Live shows of Geet Ramayan are still produced on occasion of Rama Navami.
Geet Ramayan has been translated into nine other languages and also transliterated into Braille.
The translations are :.
Murki is a short taan or inverted mordent in Hindustani classical music, known as pratyahatam in Carnatic music.
It is often delivered in rapidfire tempo, and is employed in thumris and other lighter genres.
Other taans used in thumri gyaki include the khatka and the zamzama.
This is also sometimes called Harkat or Jaga.
Szalai Peter is a Hungarian tabla player musician.
Peter Szalai plays North-Indian classical music and is one of the best west-born tabla musicians of our time.
The tabla is also a curiosity even among other Indian percussion instruments : it can be tuned to a specific pitch.
The many layers of skin and the special finger technique ensures a distinctive polyrhythmical sound.
Since 1980 he works together with the Indian classical music-playing Calcutta Trio and the Makam formation.
In 1988, during a longer Western-European tour and recording, he played alongside Albert Mangelsdorf, W. Dauner and the Family of Percussion.
The world-famous tabla master, Ustad Alla Rakha invited him to be his student.
Upon his effect he still strictly follows the traditions of the Punjab gharana.
As the member of the Calcutta Trio he plays classical Indian music since 1980 to this very day.
The club of the formation is still functioning and meets monthly at the Marczibanyi Square Cultural Centre.
Besides being the member of the Calcutta Trio, he gave many thousands of concerts since 1980.
Many prominent Indian musicians chose him as partner in Europe since the beginning of the 90s : Pr.
Debu Choudury, Nandkishor Muley, Gaurav Mazumdar, Shubhendra Rao Ustad Ikhlaq Hussain Khan and Debasish Ganguly.
In 1992, while still playing in a duo, he founded the Tin Tin with Szabolcs Szoke.
In 2002 the group also published a record.
At present he is still a wanted musician for different jazz, etno and fusion productions.
As a guest performer he played at the concerts of Amadinda, the Dresch Quartet, Bea Palya, Agi Szaloki, etc.
He participated in the production of many records like Peter Ogi, Palle Mikkelborg, Djabe, Tibor Szemzo, etc.
He considers teaching at RIMPA an important part of his work.
A biographical documentary shortfilm made in 2011 about Peter Szalai title : Without Sheet Music.
And a portrait film made in 2013 about him title : Angel in the details.
Ganapati Bhat is an Indian Hindustani classical vocalist.
He lives and works in Hasanagi, a small village in the state of Karnataka in India.
Art and Career.
Ganapati Bhat became interested in Hindustani classical music at a young age.
Bhat started his training in music as a sitarist, but was drawn into Hindustani vocal music.
He studied with C. R. Vyas and now trains young musicians in a Gurukula style setting in Hasanagi.
Bhat has performed in all the major Hindustani forums in India and abroad.
His third tour to the United States of America, starts in May 2008.
He was the first and foremost disciple of Utd.
Abdul Karim Khan and guru of Bharat Ratna laureate Pt.
Gandharva is most well known for popularizing the stylings of the Kirana Gharana through his accomplished disciples, including Pt.
Bhimsen Joshi, Dr. Gangubai Hangal, Firoz Dastur, and Pt.
Early life and background.
Born Ramchandra Kundgolkar on January 19, 1886, in Kundgol, 19 km.
from Dharwad, Karnataka, he grew to be known as Rambhau.
His father, Ganesh Saunshi, was a local clerk employed by Ranganagowda Nadiger, a landlord.
Early on, Pt.
Later, he was admitted to Lamington High School in Hubli which he would travel to everyday by train.
Gandharvas father found it increasingly difficult to fund his sons education and eventually his schooling stopped.
Initiation into music.
After discontinuing his education, Pt.
Gandharvas father put him under the tutelage of Balwantrao Kolhatkar who found himself in Kundgol.
From Kolhatkar, Pt.
Gandharva learned 75 Dhrupad compositions, 25 Tarana compositions, a hundred other compositions and also mastered a few Taals.
Kolhatkar died in 1898, leaving Pt.
Gandharvas tutelage incomplete and without guidance.
Ustad Abdul Karim Khan.
In traveling to high school everyday to Hubli, Pt.
Once, he found himself listening to a young Utd.
Abdul Karim Khan and was immediately captivated.
From then onwards, Pt.
Gandharva wished for the Ustads tutelage.
After Balwantrao Kolhatkars passing, Utd.
Abdul Karim Khan began touring Karnataka, where he often stayed with the Nadiger family, Pt.
Gandharvas fathers employer, whom Pt.
Gandharva was staying with.
It was a time when Ustad Abdul Karim Khan, the founder of Kirana Gharana, was touring Karnataka.
He would often stay with the Nadigers for days on end.
On such a trip, Ramchandra hovered around Abdul Karim Khan, humming jamunaa ke teer, the Ustad 's Bhairavi cheez.
It caught Abdul Karim Khan 's ear who asked, Kaun hai yeh ladkaa ?.
Galaa achchaa hai.
Rangangowda Nadiger pounced upon this opportunity : Ustadji, he is our clerk 's son.
He wants to learn music from you.
Yeh baath hai tho chalo hamaare saath.
Fortune smiled on Ramchandra.
This was in 1901.
Abdul Karim Khan did not want his name to be spoilt by disciples learning haphazardly.
He made a contract with them that they would learn from him for at least 8 years.
Rambhau did not complete his musical education.
Against the wishes of his teacher, he joined a drama company and became popular as a singer in Marathi theatre.
He received acclaimed for playing female roles, and also the title, Sawai Gandharva after, Bal Gandharva, the doyen of Marathi theatre.
He worked for Govindrao Tembe s Shivraj Natak Mandali for some time, becoming famous for playing female roles.
In 1942, at the age of 56, his concert career ended abruptly after he suffered a paralytic stroke.
Though he continued teaching, till the end of his life in 1952.
Sawai Gandharva Festival.
Pandit Bhimsen Joshi started the annual Sawai Gandharva Music Festival in Pune, in memory of his guru Sawai Gandharva.
The festival was held on a modest scale for first two decades.
In 1970s and 1980s, its popularity skyrocketed.
Abhishruti Bezbaruah is an Indian classical singer who performs in the classical Hindustani music genre.
She recites kabir and other popular poets.
She has performed in many countries.
The roots of bhendibazaar gharana lies in the much older Moradabad Gharana which is a complete Gharana both vocal and instrumental.
History and features.
Ustad Chhajju Khans son Ustad Aman Ali Khan, and Anjanibai Malpekar, are well-known exponents of this gharana.
Amir Khan s father Shahmir Khan belonged to this gharana and passed on the tradition to his son.
Ustad Dilawar Hussain Khan.
Ustad Chhajjoo Khan, Ustad Nazeer Khan, Ustad Khadim Hussain Khan.
Faiyyaz Khan ; Dr. Jyoti Dhamdhere ; Anupama Chandratreya.
Anupama Chandratreya ; Anuradha Kuber ; Anuradha Marathe ; Kishori Janorikar ; Kumudini Mundkur ; Sadhana Joshi ; Sharad Karmarkar ;.
Dr. Suhasini Koratkar ; Vasundhara Pandit ; Shrikant Padgaonkar ; Padmakar Kulkarni ;.
Neelatai Nagpurkar ; Upendra Kamat ; Mandakini Gadre ; Shubha Joshi ; Shaila Pipalpure ; Pramila Datar ; Madhura Jasraj ;.
Shahmir Khan ; Chand Khan ; Kaderbaksh ; Mamman Khan ; Zande Khan ; Miyan Jaan ; Wadilal Shivram.
Kumar Gandharva ; Kishori Amonkar ; Begum Akhtar ; Nainadevi.
Asha Bhosle ; Jitendra Abhisheki ; Suman Kalyanpur ; Pankaj Udhas.
Mukund Vyas ; daughters Kiran and Neelam Shukla.
Sakuntala Narsimhan ; Devendra Murdeshwar ; Mahendra Kapoor.
Jai Uttal is an American musician.
He is a Grammy nominated singer and  a pioneer in the world music community with his eclectic East-meets-West sound.
At 19, Uttal moved to California and studied under the famous Sarod player, Ali Akbar Khan.
Uttal spent time with many beings of both the Hindu and Buddhist traditions.
He became deeply absorbed in the practice of kirtan, the ancient yoga of chanting, or singing to God.
This form of prayer became the core to Uttal 's musical and spiritual life.
Uttal 's music is very popular in the yoga community, being described as  very hypnotic.
One reviewer stated,  He does a great job of explaining the purpose of chanting and kirtan.
Uttal says,  These ancient chants contain a transformative power and healing energy.
By singing these prayers we join a stream of consciousness and devotion that has been flowing for centuries.
Uttal says,  Music that creates bridges.
Music that unites hearts and cultures.
Music that brings peace.
Uttal has led kirtans around the world for more than 30 years.
The album was in the top ten on the world music charts.
In 1993, Uttal released Monkey.
The next year, in 1994, Beggars and Saints was released, which was a  tribute to the Bauls of Bangal.
In addition to the new album, Uttal produced two CD 's for his teacher, Ustad Ali Akbar.
Journey and Garden of Dreams became extremely popular in the Indian community.
Three years later, Shiva Station was released, which was mixed by innovative producer, Bill Laswell.
Shiva Station presented traditional chants in a totally new way.
Around this time the popularity of yoga was on the rise.
Uttal began to receive more requests to lead kirtan workshops and concerts all over the world.
Uttal released a live kirtan CD entitled Nectar to begin to chronicle these kirtan events.
In 2000, a compilation of his four Triloka albums appeared as Spirit Room.
The album has been called Uttals most personal expression to date.
In 2009, Uttal released Thunder Love.
Uttal 's soulful singing and spiritual themes provide the crucial connective thread throughout the album.
In 2003, Uttal began the first of several recordings focused on the practice of bhakti yoga for the Sounds True label.
These have included : Kirtan !.
The two had a son, Ezra, which led to Uttal 's inspiration to focus his work towards kids.
In addition to those, Uttal also hosted donation-based events at several yoga studios.
The chants during these events were kid-friendly versions.
Kirtan Kids recreates the feeling of these events and gives parents a new way to introduce children to kirtan.
Rabin Ghosh hailed from a family with a strong musical background.
His father was an.
Engineer and played Flute and Esraj.
Rabin Ghosh continued his training more than a decade under the tutelage of Haripada Chattopadhay.
During this time he not only won violin Competitions, also performed in concerts along with All India Radio, Calcutta.
Way to Maihar.
He played Raga Mian ki Todi before him.
Baba Allauddin Khan Saheb was satisfied to accept him as his disciple.
In the mid of 1955, Rabin Ghosh left for Maihar.
Life at Maihar.
Life at Maihar for Rabin Ghosh was very dedicated.
Besides receiving training from Baba Allauddin Khan Saheb, he was appointed as a teacher of Maihar Government Music College.
Rabin Ghosh had a very strict and long duration practice session which he maintained till the last day in Maihar.
In his own words I used to light a thick fragrance stick and would continue practice till it burned out totally.
Invention of 5th string on violin.
From 1960, Rabin Ghosh used ` Five String Violin ' starting with his performances at Tansen Sangeet Sanmelan, Calcutta.
Resting violin on case.
Rabin Ghosh 's playing style was enriched with the amalgamation of singing as well as tantrakari.
He used to use extensive ` Micro-Tone ' to imitate the Indian Singing style.
Another distinct feature of his playing style was holding the violin.
He used his ` specially made violin case ' for resting his violin.
Introduction of Tala.
The ragas in which he explored himself are Jhila Kafi, Bhupali, Kirwani, Khamaj etc.
His honest effort to con flux two parallel voices in a composition tuned out to be a grand success.
A compact disc album named ` Niharika ' played by his disciples was released with orchestral works.
From 1970 and 1972 The Gramophone Company of India Limited released Three Long Playing Discs.
HMV released a disk consists of Raga Brindabani Sarang, Raga Bageshree by Rabin Ghosh with Himangshu Biswas, Dinesh ch.
Chandra and Shyamal Bose.
Maestro Rabin Ghosh established a new dimension in the field of Indian Classical Music on Violin.
As a result he was associated with Ali Akbar College of Music, Calcutta, Tansen Music College as teacher of violin.
Rabin Ghosh was associated with Rabindra Bharati University as lecturer of Instrumental Music Department.
He held the position of Examiner for Vishwa Bharati University and for Prayag Sangit Samiti.
Awards and achievements.
Awarded certificate for standing first in ` All Bengal Music Competition ' on Indian Classical Music.
Also awarded prestigious ` Tulsidas Chatterjee Medal ' for outstanding performance in the competition, Calcutta, in 1950.
Awarded ` Sangeet Gunakar ' by the All India Music Conference, in 1954.
Awarded certificate for standing first in the ` All India Music Competition on Indian Classical Music ', Allahabad, in 1954.
Awarded ` Sangeet Prabhakar ' with gold medal and certified for standing first, Allahabad, in 1966.
Awarded ` Sangeet Dishari ' title from the ` Critic Association ' for two consecutive years.
Awarded ` Sur Moni ' title from Bombay.
Honored with Gold Medal by All India Music Conference.
Awarded Three Gold Medals in Berlin Festival in 1973 in Berlin, Germany.
Awarded ` Sangeet Pravin ' with three gold medals and certified for standing first, Allahabad, in 1982.
But Maestro Rabin Ghosh is a musician whose eminence can not be measured in gold medals and titles alone.
Anjanibai Malpekar was a noted Indian classical singer, belonging to the Bhendibazaar gharana of Hindustani classical music.
She was a disciple of Ustad Nazeer Khan of the gharana, with whom she started training at age 8.
She made her professional debut at age 16 in Mumbai, where she spent the rest of her life.
Thereafter she focussed on training her music disciples, notably Kumar Gandharva and Kishori Amonkar.
Early life and background.
Malpekar was born on April 22, 1883, in Malpe in Goa, in music loving family that belonged to Goan Kalavant community.
Both her grandmother Gujabai and mother Nabubai were respected names in music circles.
At young age of 8, she started her musical training under the tutelage of Ustad Nazeer Khan of Bhendibazaar gharana.
The gharana had its origins in the much older Moradabad gharana, and was based in the Bhendi Bazaar area of Mumbai.
Malpekar gave her debut performance at a concert in Mumbai in 1899, at the age of 16.
In time, she became the doyenne of the gharana.
Besides her singing, she also got acclaim for her beauty.
Meanwhile she married Seth Wasanji Ved.
Finally, after a last performance at Town Hall, Mumbai, she gave up her public singing career in 1923.
Thus at age 40, she decided to devote the rest of her years, to teaching music.
She died on August 7, 1974 in Bombay, at the age of 91.
Ivor Cutler was a Scottish poet, songwriter and humorist.
He appeared in The Beatles Magical Mystery Tour film in 1967 and on Neil Innes television programmes.
He told Andy Kershaw on his radio show that he also gave private poetry lessons to individuals.
In live performances Cutler would often accompany himself on a harmonium.
Phyllis King appears on several of his records, and for a number of years was a part of his concerts.
She usually read small phrases but also read a few short stories.
The two starred in a BBC radio series, King Cutler, in which they performed their material jointly and singly.
Cutler also collaborated with pianist Neil Ardley and singer Robert Wyatt.
Others included Kindly disregard, reserved for official correspondence, and to remove this label take it off.
In performance his delivery was frail, halting and minimally inflected.
His writing sometimes edged into whimsy or the macabre.
Many of his poems and songs are in the form of conversations delivered as a monologue.
Cutler describes the poverty of his early life and the neglect he experienced from his parents with great stoicism.
Cutler earned a faithful cult following.
Cutler was a member of the Noise Abatement Society and the Voluntary Euthanasia Society.
He retired from performing in 2004, and died on 3 March 2006.
The reception room of his home contained a number of pieces of ivory cutlery, intended as a pun on his name.
Cutler was born in Glasgow into a middle-class Jewish family of Eastern European descent.
In 1939 Cutler was evacuated to Annan.
He joined the Royal Air Force as a navigator in 1942 but was soon dismissed for dreaminess.
He was married briefly and had two children.
In the film, Cutler plays bus conductor Buster Bloodvessel, who becomes passionately attracted to Ringo Starr s Aunt Jessie.
After its release Cutler continued to perform for BBC radio, recording the first of his sessions for John Peel in 1969.
Each of these discs intersperses Cutlers poems and songs with readings by his performing companion Phyllis King.
2, regarded as a particularly autobiographical work, on which Cutler recounts tales from his childhood amid an environment of exaggerated Scottishness.
Cutler also produced the work as a book, which was published in 1984 with illustrations by Martin Honeysett.
He also collaborated with Portal artist Frances Broomfield on an illustrated alphabet book, which was never completed.
In the 1980s, Rough Trade Records released three LPs -- Privilege, Prince Ivor and Gruts.
Cutler also released the single Women of the World, recorded with Linda Hirst, through the label in 1983.
He enjoyed further interest from the Creation record company in the 1990s, best known at the time as Oasis record label.
The label released two new volumes of poems and spoken word work : A Wet Handle and A Flat Man.
Steve Oda is a sarod player, composer and teacher of the Hindustani classical music.
His love of creativity through musical expression led him to the classic music of North India and the sarode.
His classical training started in 1971 under the guidance of Aashish Khan, and from 1973 under Aashishs father, Ali Akbar Khan.
There he served for two years as Executive Director of the Ali Akbar College of Music in San Rafael, California.
He has performed with Sharda Sahai, Bob Becker, Anubrata Chatterjee, Vineet Vyas, Ravi Naimpally, Ty Burhoe, Stephen Bacchus and Betty Moon.
Steven has accompanied Ali Akbar Khan, Aashish Khan and Anindo Chatterjee.
He currently resides in San Rafael, California, actively teaching and performing music of North India.
Asad Ali Khan.
Asad Ali Khan was an Indian musician who played the plucked string instrument rudra veena.
Khan performed in the style dhrupad and was described as the best living rudra veena player in India by The Hindu.
He was awarded the Indian civilian honor Padma Bhushan in 2008.
Life and career.
Khan was born 1937 in Alwar in the seventh generation of rudra veena players in his family.
His ancestors were royal musicians in the courts of Rampur, Uttar Pradesh, and Jaipur, Rajasthan in the 18th century.
His great-grandfather Rajab Ali Khan was head of the court musicians in Jaipur and owned a village land holding.
His grandfather Musharraf Khan was court musician in Alwar, and performed in London in 1886.
Khan grew up in a musical surrounding and was taught the Beenkar gharana of Jaipur and vocals for fifteen years.
Students of Khan who perform include his son Zaki Haidar and Bikramjeet Das of Kolkata.
Khan criticized the lack of willingness among Indians to study the rudra veena and has more foreign than Indian students.
Khan was a Shia Muslim.
He was described as the best living rudra veena player in India by The Hindu and lived in Delhi.
Khan died on 14 June 2011 in the All India Institute of Medical Sciences in New Delhi.
Khan never married and is survived by his nephew and adopted son Zaki Haidar.
A gharana also indicates a comprehensive musicological ideology.
This ideology sometimes changes substantially from one gharana to another.
It directly affects the thinking, teaching, performance and appreciation of music.
The word gharana comes from the Hindi word ghar, which means family or house.
The gharana system in khyal was rooted in the guru-shishya tradition and was similar to the Dhrupad Bani system.
The prominent khyal gharanas are :.
The principal feature of the thumri of the Patiala gharana is its incorporation of the tappa from the Punjab region.
The following are the six widely accepted Tabla Gharanas.
The prominent Tabla Gharanas are in bold :.
The 22 Srutis are the only notes which can be useful for music in an  octave , in this view.
The sections below describe the experiment.
Sarana Chatushtai experiment on two similar sitars.
The two veenas or sitars having the same qualities in all respect can be used to perform the Sarana Chatushtai experiment.
Now we can measure the sruti value and hence provide 22 frets starting from the 5th sruti of second note Re.
The shruti distances as per the compression factors are calculated for all the 34 length of the string.
18 frets are required to reach up to the end note Ni of the saptak in both the instruments.
The next part is to sound the Chala sitar to Shadjagrama tune.
Repeat the above mentioned procedure to further lower down the Chala sitar by one more Pramana Sruti.
Here we get the pair of 2 shruti values.
Repeat the above procedure once again and further lower down the Chala sitar by one more sruti in shadjagrama.
Now the difference in both the instruments set in Shadjagrama is of 3 Pramana Shruti values.
Here we see the notes Sa and Pa of Achala sitar will merge in Re & Dha notes of Chala sitar.
Madhup Mudgal is an Indian Hindustani classical music vocalist.
, known for his khayal and bhajan renditions.
He received the prestigious Padma Shri award from Government of India in 2006.
Early life and training.
Madhup Mudgal was born in New Delhi to Professor Vinay Chandra Maudgalya, a renowned classical musician from the Gwalior gharana.
His father started Gandharva Mahavidyalaya, New Delhi in 1939 from their home near Plaza cinema, Connaught Place.
Because of that, Madhup grew up in a musical environment, where veteran musicians like Pt.
Omkarnath Thakur and Ali Akbar Khan would come by regularly for sangeet baithaks.
Madhup Mudgal travels across the world for his performances.
He has remained the conductor of the Gandharva Choir, a music group for many years.
He also composes music for the productions of his sister, Odissi dancer and choreographer, Madhavi Mudgal.
His sister is noted Odissi dancer Madhavi Mudgal, who also teaches at Gandharva Mahavidyalaya.
His brother Mukul Mudgal is a retired Chief Justice of the Punjab and Haryana High Court.
Born on January 4, 1949, Justice Mudgal was appointed as a Judge of the Delhi High Court on March 2, 1998.
He was sworn in as Chief Justice of the High Court on December 5, 2009 and retired on January 3, 2011.
Madhuvanti is the name of a raga used in Indian classical music.
This Raag is based on Kalyan Thaat.It is a romantic raga based on the foundation, eternity and colors of love.
Madhu literally means honey.
It is a very sweet raga with a very simple philosophy of love and romance.
Madhuvanti belongs to thaat Todi.
Madhuvanti is played after 4 pm before 8 pm.
Madhuvanti expresses a gentle loving sentiment.
Refer to the introduction.
Madhuvanti is the janya raga of the 59th Melakarta of Carnatic Music, Dharmavati.
Structure and Lakshana.
Its structure is as follows :.
The notes used are Chathusruthi Rishabham, Sadharana Gandharam, Prati Madhyamam, Chathusruthi Dhaivatham and Kakali Nishadham.
Notations of Carnatic music and Hindustani music differ a little bit.
It is an audava-sampurna raga.
Madhuvanti is a very melodious raga.
This raga has been used to compose many tukadas.
Sri Sadasiva Brahmendras composition, Sarvam Brahmamayam is often rendered in this raga.
It has also been used in Indian movie songs and music as it lends itself to lilting melodies.
List of Film Songs based on Ragas.
Sameer Gupta is a San Francisco - based jazz percussionist, tabla player, and composer.
He is the founder of the jazz ensemble The Supplicants and drummer for the Marc Cary Focus Trio.
The Jazz Observer called his playing, kinetic, bass-heavy, and tender.
G. S. Sachdev.
G. S. Sachdev is an Indian performer of the bansuri.
He performs Hindustani classical music.
Mr. Sachdev is on the advisory board of the World Flute Society.
Among his students are Oscar van Dillen and Jin Hi Kim.
Pradeep Barot is a sarod maestro based in Bombay, India.
Born to a gifted clarionet player Mohan lal Barot, Pradeep from a young age displayed immense musical talent.
At the age of fourteen, Barot was accepted as a student by the legendary sarodya Vasant Rai.
For five years Vasant taught Barot and groomed him to be a formidable performer.
who was Vasants gurus daughter.
Hearing Barot Annapurna Devi was impressed, and accepted him as a pupil.
Barot still continues his training with Annapurana.
Pandit Kishan Maharaj was an Indian tabla player who belonged to the Benares gharana of Hindustani classical music.
Early life and background.
Kishan Maharaj was born in Kabir Chaura, Benaras into a family of professional musicians.
He was initially trained in classical music by his father, Hari Maharaj.
Kishan Maharaj, by the time he was eleven, he began performing in concerts.
Maharaj had the ability to play cross-rhythms and produce complex calculations, particularly in tihai patterns.
Among all his compositions, his Tala Vadya Kacheri with the Mridangam Vidwan, Palghat Raghu stood out.
Maharaj won the Padma Shri in 1973 and the Padma Vibhushan in 2002.
For many years, he was married to Savita Devi, daughter of Siddheshwari Devi.
Death and legacy.
Kishan Maharaj died on May 4, 2008 at Khajuri near Varanasi at the age of 84.
Vishwa Mohan Bhatt.
Vishwa Mohan lives in Jaipur, Rajasthan, India, with his wife and two sons.
His nephew, Krishna Bhatt, plays the sitar and tabla.
Folk musician Harry Manx, who studied with Salil Bhatt and Vishwa Mohan Bhatt for five years, plays a Mohan Veena.
Counting Crows Bassist Matt Malley also plays a Mohan Veena and is a student and friend of Vishwa Mohan Bhatt.
Australian Musician Lawrie Minson also learnt Mohan Veena from Salil and Vishwa Mohan Bhatt.
Tejendra Narayan Majumdar is an Indian sarod player and pupil of Bahadur Khan.
Tejendra Narayan Majumdar is one of the most popular and celebrated modern sarod players.
He started his music training under his grandfather Bibhuti Ranjan Majumdar with mandolin.
He also received vocal and tabla training under Amaresh Chowdhury and Anil Palit.
Later he trained under Bahadur Khan for 18 years until the latter died.
He then continued under Ajay Sinha Roy and Ali Akbar Khan.
He has played duets with Shujaat Khan.
The rendering of raag Charukeshi is especially notable.
He is married to Manasi Majumder and has one son, Indrayudh.
He directed music for a Bengali movie called Tollylights, directed by Arjun Chakraborty.
He is also directing music for another Bengali movie Hanankaal due to be released in 2010.
K. J. Yesudas.
Kattassery Joseph Yesudas is an Indian classical musician and playback singer.
Yesudas sings Indian classical, devotional, and popular music.
He has performed in most Indian languages except Assamese, Konkani and Kashmiri.
He also composed a number of Malayalam film songs in the 1970s and 1980s.
Yesudas is fondly called Gana Gandharvan.
In 2011 Yesudas was honoured with the CNN-IBN outstanding achievement award having recorded over 50,000 songs in a five-decade career.
In 2006, he sang 16 film songs in four South Indian languages on the same day at AVM Studio, Chennai.
Early life and background.
His father, who was a well-known Malayalam classical musician and stage actor, was his first guru.
Later he joined the R.L.V. Music Academy at Thrippunithura and underwent training.
Later he studied at Sree Swati Thirunal music college, Thiruvananthapuram under the late Semmangudy Sreenivasa Iyer.
But he could not complete his studies due to financial constraints.
In 2011 he completed his 50 Years as a Play Back Singer.
Playback singing career.
Debut and Early career : In 1960s.
He got the first break in his music career with the hit Malayalam film named Bharya.
He sang in Tamil for Bommai first, but the first released movie was Konjum Kumari.
The trio of Salil, Yesudas and Prem Nazir took the Malayalam Cinema Industry of the 70s by storm.
It was generally agreed that Yesudass voice was the most suited one for Prem Nazir.
On 9 Dec 1971, Yesudas missed a flight which later crashed on the way to Madurai.
A Hawker Siddeley HS 748 near Chinnamanur was descending into Madurai in reduced visibility.
It flew into high terrain about 50 mi from the airport, killing the four crew members and 17 passengers.
Bollywood entry : 1970s.
By the 1970s Yesudas entered Bollywood.
He has sung Hindi songs for many leading actors in Hindi cinema including Amitabh Bachchan, Amol Palekar and Jeetendra.
He has sung many evergreen Hindi film songs for music directors including Ravindra Jain, Bappi Lahiri, Khayyam, Rajkamal and Salil Chowdhury.
Yesudass most popular Hindi songs are in the 1976 movie Chitchor, with music given by Ravindra Jain.
Prominence over the world.
Yesudas has performed in many major cities around the world.
Yesudas became one of the senate members in the International Parliament for Safety and Peace.
In his music concerts in the Middle East he sings Arabic songs in the Carnatic style.
He frequently serves as a cultural ambassador for India through his performances abroad, promoting Indian music.
In 2009 Yesudas began a cross-country musical campaign against terrorism in Thiruvananthapuram, with the motto Music For Peace.
Kavita Karkare, wife of Hemant Karkare, handed over the torch to Yesudas to mark the launch of the Shanthi Sangeetha Yatra.
Yesudas is married to Prabha.
They have three sons, Vinod, Vijay and Vishal.
The family is currently settled in Chennai and Trivandrum.
He also owns estates in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, USA and Flower Mound, TX, USA for personal and business reasons.
He had his own heroes among the musicians too.
Mohammed Rafi, Chembai Vaidyanatha Bhagavatar and Balamurali Krishna are the ones he admires the most.
The music festival started on his 60th birthday.
The nine-day music festival begins every January at Kollur Mookambika Temple.
The Sangeetharchana included Pancharatna Gayana of Thyagarajas poems.
He also took part in the Vidyarambha function.
All India Radio broadcast the special Sangeetharchana all over Kerala.
In 1980 Yesudas established the Tharangani Studio at Trivandrum.
The record company also had a voice mixing studio in Studio27, Chennai.
The studio continues to produce and present events of Yesudas both for film and Indian classical music concerts throughout the world.
Awards and honours.
He is the only singer who has been accorded the title Asthana Gayakan of Kerala State.
Official website of www.drkjyesudas.com.
Ghulam Mustafa Khan.
Ustad Ghulam Mustafa Khan is an Indian classical musician in the Hindustani classical music tradition.
He has been associated with Hindi film industry and as teacher his has trained several noted playback and classical singers.
He was awarded the Padma Shri in 1991, followed by Padma Bhushan, the third highest civilian award of India in 2006.
He was born on March 3, 1931 in Badayun, Uttar Pradesh.
He is married to Amina Begum who is grand daughter of Mushtaq Hussain Khan.
They have 4 sons who are Murtaza Khan, Qadir Mustafa, Rabbani Khan, Hasan Khan.
He is also the uncle and guru of classical vocalist Rashid Khan.
He currently lives in Mumbai, Maharashtra along with his family.
He has been involved as playback singer and music director of award winning feature films like :.
Vishnu Digambar Paluskar.
Pandit Vishnu Digambar Paluskar was a Hindustani musician.
He sang the original version of the bhajan Raghupati Raghava Raja Ram, and founded the Gandharva Mahavidyalaya in 1901.
Early life and background.
His father, Digambar Gopal Paluskar, was a singer of Kirtan.
He went to a local school in Kurundwad for primary education.
But tragedy struck Paluskar at an early age.
During a Hindu festival called Datta Jayanti, a fire-cracker burst near his face damaging both his eyes.
Being a small town, there was no immediate treatment available and Paluskar lost his eyesight.
Nevertheless, he regained it some years later.
The king of Miraj recognising the talent in the boy put him under the guidance of Balakrishnabuwa Ichalkaranjikar, a learned musician.
Paluskar trained under him for 12 years until in 1896 the relations between the teacher and student became strained.
After that Paluskar began touring the country and studied the musical traditions in each part of Northern India.
Till then, concerts were given only in palaces or temples.
He studied Brijbhasha, a dialect of Hindi, spoken at Mathura.
Vishnu Digambar met Pandit Chandan Chaube and learnt Dhrupad music from him.
In 1901, he reached Lahore, where he decided to establish a music school.
On May 5, 1901 Paluskar founded the Gandharva Mahavidyalaya, a School to impart formal training in Indian classical music.
It was a challenge to the traditional method where a student lived under the teachers roof.
Many students from the Schools early batches became respected musicians and teachers in North India.
This brought respect to musicians, who were treated with disdain earlier.
In September 1908, Paluskar went to Bombay to establish another branch of the School.
As the work-load increased, he shifted the school from Lahore to Bombay.
To accommodate all the students, he took loans, built a new building for the school and hostel as well.
To settle debts, he gave several public concerts.
But while on a concert tour in 1924, Paluskars creditors attached his properties and auctioned off the school.
Paluskar died on August 21, 1931.
He has written a book on music called Sangeet Bal Prakash in three volumes, and 18 volumes on ragas as well.
His son Dattatreya Vishnu Paluskar was also trained in classical music and carried on his fathers mission.
In 2000, the India Today magazine named Pandit Paluskar to be one of the 100 people who shaped India.
is a Mumbai, India-based vocalist renowned for her specialization in Indian classical, semi-classical and devotional music including Natya Sangeet.
Born in Sangli, Maharashtra, India, in 1955, Asha took her initial steps in music under the guidance of Late Shri.
Yashwantbuwa Joshi, a stalwart of Gwalior Gharana.
Affiliation with Sa Re Ga Ma Pa.
This season featured adults in their mid-thirties and forties who pursued music as a hobby.
Dhrupad is a vocal genre in Hindustani classical music, said to be the oldest still in use in that musical tradition.
Its name is derived from the words dhruva and pada, where a part of the poem is used as a refrain.
The term may denote both the verse form of the poetry and the style in which it is sung.
Thematic matter ranges from the religious and spiritual to royal panegyrics, musicology and romance.
Though Dhrupad is basically a vocal tradition, its musical aesthetics have been adopted by many instrumentalists.
It is mentioned in samaveda and sang in temples.
The earliest source that mentions a musical genre called Dhrupad is Ain-i-Akbari of Abu Fazl.
Later works attribute much of the material to musicians in the court of Man Singh Tomar of Gwalior.
Ravi Shankar states that the form appeared in the fifteenth century as a development from the prabandha, which it replaced.
Under Mughal rule it was appropriated as court music.
However the musical background of dhrupad is commonly thought to have a long history, traceable back to the Vedas themselves.
The Yugala Shataka of Shri Shribhatta in the Nimbarka Sampradaya, written in 1294 CE, contains lyrics of similar fashion.
Swami Haridas, the guru of Tansen, was a well known dhrupad singer.
The 18th Century saw the beginning of a great decline of dhrupad singing.
Only a few families carried on the tradition.
In 1960 the French ethnomusicologist Alain Danielou invited Nasir Moinuddin and Nasir Aminuddin Dagar to perform in Europe.
The Dagars toured widely and recorded.
Today, dhrupad enjoys a place as a well-respected but not widely popular genre, no longer on the brink of extinction.
Nature and Practice.
Traditionally the only other instrument used was the Rudra Veena.
Some artists have used other instruments.
Preferably, such instruments should have a deep bass register and long sustain.
Like all Indian classical music, dhrupad is modal and monophonic, with a single melodic line and no chord progression.
Each raga has a modal frame - a wealth of micro-tonal ornamentations are typical.
The text is preceded by a wholly improvised section, the alap.
Dhrupad styles have long elaborate alaps, their slow and deliberate melodic development gradually bringing an accelerating rhythmic pulse.
The latter is seen as a lighter musical form, associated with the Holi spring festival.
Alongside concert performance the practice of singing dhrupad in temples continues, though only a small number of recordings have been made.
Family and style.
But more importantly, there are a number of dhrupad gharanas : houses, or family styles.
The best-known gharana is the Dagar family, who sing in the Dagar vani.
The Dagar style puts great emphasis on alap and for several generations their singers have performed in pairs.
The Dagars are Muslims but sing Hindu texts of Gods and Goddesses.
From Bihar state come two other gharanas, the Malliks and the Mishras.
The Malliks are linked to the Khandar vani and emphasize the composed song over improvised alap with variety of layakaris.
Ram Chatur Mallik, Vidur Mallick, and Siyaram Tiwari were well known exponents of Darbhanga gharana in the last century.
Today the senior performer of the Darbhanga gharana is Prem Kumar Mallick.
Prashant Kumar Mallick and Nishant Kumar Mallick are Dhrupad vocalist among young generation of Darbhanga tradition.
The Mishras practise both Nauhar and Khandar styles with some unique techniques for nomtom alap.
This gharana flourished under the patronage of the kings of Bettiah Raj.
The most famous exponents of the Bettiah gharana today are Indrakishore Mishra and Falguni Mitra.
The form of dhrupad prevalent in Darbhanga and Bettiah is known as the Haveli style.
In Pakistan dhrupad is represented by the Talwandi gharana, who sing in the Khandar style.
Ghulam Sadiq Khan.
Ghulam Sadiq Khan is an Indian classical music vocalist.
Popularly known as Ustad Ghulam Sadiq Khan, he belongs to the Rampur-Sahaswan gharana of the Mian Tansen tradition.
He specializes in the khayal vocal style and also sings thumri, dadra, and bhajans.
He is a top graded artist of All India Radio and Doordarshan.
He worked as Senior Lecturer in the Faculty of Music at the University of Delhi.
In 2005, he received the Padma Shri for his contribution to Indian classical music.
Chants of India.
Chants of India is an album by Indian musician Ravi Shankar released in 1997 on Angel Records.
The lyrical themes of the recorded chants are peace and harmony among nature and all creatures.
Anoushka Shankar, John Barham, Bikram Ghosh, Tarun Bhatacharaya and Ronu Majumdar are among the many musicians who contributed to the recording.
Shankar considered it to be among the best works of his 60-year career.
Chants of India was the last formal collaboration between Shankar and Harrison, who was diagnosed with cancer shortly after its release.
Background and content.
According to Shankar, the record company were hoping to repeat the commercial success of a recording by those Spanish monks.
Some have even attempted to make them more popular by using a semi-classical and commercial approach.
Harrison biographer Gary Tillery describes the songs focus, following the opening invocations, as peace, love, ecology, and social harmony.
Chants of India reunited Shankar and Harrison with English musician and arranger John Barham.
From 7 July, sessions ran intermittently through to late August.
According to Lavezzoli, the album was one of Shankars personal favorite works.
Release and reception.
Angel Records issued Chants of India on 6 May 1997 in America, with a UK release following on 1 September.
The album was marketed as a collaborative work, and Harrison joined Shankar in promoting the release.
Chants of India was critically well-received, while commercially it peaked at number 3 on Billboard magazines Top World Music Albums chart.
Harrisons deft touch allows the music to develop and maintain its own integrity.
Among records of this nature, this one is special.
Legacy and reissue.
Chants of India was the last formal musical collaboration between Shankar and Harrison.
The album-closing Sarve Shaam appears at the start of David Leland s Concert for George documentary film,.
All songs are traditional, adapted by Ravi Shankar, except where noted.
Sohni is a raga in Hindustani classical music in the Marwa thaat.
Alternate transliterations include Sohani and Sohini.
Like Bahar, it is a small raga, with not much space for elaboration.
It emotes the feel of longing, of passive sensuousness.
The raga is of audav-shadav nature, i.e, it has five swaras in the arohana and six in the avarohana.
Rishabh is komal and Madhyam is Tivra, while all other swaras are shuddha.
Pancham is not used.
Arohana : Sa Ga Ma # Dha Ni Sa.
Avarohana : Sa Ni Dha, Ga Ma # Dha Ga Ma # Ga Re # Sa.
Pakad : 1.
Sa Ni Dha, Ga Ma # Dha Ga Ma # Ga. 2.
Sa Ni Dha, Ni Dha Ga Ma #, Ga Ma #, Ga Re # Sa.
The vadi swara is Dha, and samvadi is Ga.
The rishabh is weak, but Gandhar is strong, unlike Marwa.
It is an Uttaranga pradhan raga, with the higher notes on the saptak being used more frequently.
Raga Sohni is associated with very late night / pre-dawn, the last or eighth period of day, roughly from 3-6AM.
It is somewhat similar to Marwa and Puriya ragas in the same thaat, and also to Basant in the Poorvi thaat.
Gopal Krishan was an exponent of vichitra veena, an ancient instrument.
He was taught initially by his father, Nand Kishore, who was himself a noted surbahar player and vocalist.
Krishan was a versatile musician.
His musical expertise was not restricted to the vichitra veena.
Amongst his disciples are Vinay Jain and Ronald Simpson.
He represented the Farukhabad, Delhi, and Ajrada gharanas of tabla, and the Nana Panse tradition of pakhavaj.
He had numerous disciples and students of special training.
Early life and background.
Taranath Rao was a close collaborator with influential figures such as Allaudin Khan, Ravi Shankar and the revolutionary flautist Pannalal Ghosh.
As a soloist, Rao was known for the architecture and content of his recitals.
These normally weaved together sequences of exclusive, archival material with his original compositions.
Such pieces were difficult to execute, drawing upon diverse influences in tabla and pakhavaj.
As an accompanist, Rao performed with nearly all prominent vocal and instrumental raga legends of his time.
Along with Jnan Prakash Ghosh of Calcutta, he helped pioneer many contemporary features of solo tabla drumming, such as duo performance.
In terms of sheer numbers, Rao was a prolific guru, introducing to some 2,000 students the legacy of traditional gharana masters.
His tradition is carried on by the Peshkar Foundation.
Ramkumar Mishra is an Indian tabla player.
He belongs to Banaras Gharana.
Life and career.
Ramkumar Mishra is the grandson of Pandit Anokhelal Mishra from Banaras gharana and son of Pandit Chhannulal Mishra.
Ramkumar was initiated into tabla playing by his mother, Smt.
He performs with all the major artists like Shiv Kumar Sharma, Pandit Vishwamohan Bhatt, Pandit Ronu Mazumdar, Pandit Jasraj etc.
Some of the awards he has received are :.
Bade Ghulam Ali Khan.
Bade Ghulam Ali Khan was a Hindustani classical vocalist, from the Patiala gharana.
Early life and background.
His father was a famous singer, Ali Baksh Khan, in a West Punjabi family of musical heritage.
This tenure lasted for almost three years.
It was at this juncture that he improvised the musical instrument Kanun to the present Swarmandal which became his trademark.
He became popular as a vocalist after his debut concert in Kolkata.
His voice had a wide range, spanning three octaves, effortless rendition, sweetness, flexibility and ease of movement in all tempi.
He lived at various times in Lahore, Bombay, Calcutta, and Hyderabad.
He demanded a very, very high price, reportedly Rs.
500 per song.
Khan was awarded the Sangeet Natak Akademi Award and the Padma Bhushan in 1962.
He continued to sing and perform in public with the support of his son Munawar Ali Khan until his death.
Today, the Bade Ghulam Ali Khan Yaadgar Sabha, founded by his disciple Malti Gilani, keeps his music and memory alive.
It aims to promote Hindustani classical music and organises many concerts to this end.
Its primary aim, however, is to provide medical aid to ailing musicians.
The Sabha organises a Sabrang Utsav every year in the memory of the maestro.
Under his pen name, Sabrang, Khan left numerous compositions.
Khan was married to Ali Jiwai, who died in 1932.
His son Munawar was a classical singer.
His grandson, Raza Ali Khan, is also a classical singer.
The main street at Basheerbagh is named Ustad Bade Ghulam Ali Khan Marg in his honour.
Pandit Shyam Kane is an Indian Tabla player of the Punjab Gharana.
Kane is most recognized for being the first and foremost disciple and colleague of Utd.
Personal life and education.
Kane was born into a Konkanastha Brahmin family in 1954 and attended Parle Tilak Vidyalaya.
Kane was drawn to the Tabla after his brother, Mukund Kane, took to Tabla under Pt.
Pandharinath Nageshkar of the Farukhabad Gharana.
Influenced by his brother, Pt.
Kane began his journey in Tabla.
Kane witnessed a performance with Utd.
Zakir Hussain on Tabla, he wished to learn under the young master.
Captivated by the balance, clarity and creativity of Utd.
Zakir Hussains style, Pt.
Kane immediately asked for him for tutelage.
In 1975, Pt.
Kane became a Gandabandhan disciple of Utd.
Alla Rakha and began learning under both father and son.
Kane has become a popular Tabla accompanist in India, North America, and Europe.
Kane participated in the Festival of India sponsored by the Government of India.
Kane has taught Tabla at San Diego State University and the Ali Akbar College of Music in San Rafael, California.
Kane frequently performs alongside his guru, Utd.
Zakir Hussain, where recently both performed together at the 2007 Brihan Maharashtra Mandal Convention in Seattle.
Kane has performed alongside Pt.
Hariprasad Chaurasia, Utd.
Ali Akbar Khan, Smt.
Ashwini Bhide-Deshpande, Smt.
N. Rajam, and Smt.
Kishori Amonkar, Asha Khadilkar among others.
Raza Ali Khan.
Ustad Raza Ali Khan is an Indian classical vocalist of the Kasur Patiala Gharana.
Personal life and education.
He received his early training from his grandfather and after that from his father.
He also accompanied his father on concerts.
He married Sahibzadi Samina Khan, great granddaughter of Nawab Asman Jah Bahadur, daughter of Nawab Mohd.
Raza Ali performs Khayal, Thumri, Dadra, Ghazal, Geet, Sozkhani, Noha Khani, and Manqabat.
He gave his first solo performance at the Youth Festival in 1977 at the Eden Garden Stadium at Calcutta.
He remained the chief music director of Venus for four years.
He also gave music in a Telefilm named Bindia which was produced by Doordarshan and was directed by Uma Vasudeva.
- Gharana Lineage.
- 3 Generations.
- A Tribute to Ustad Bade Ghulam Ali Khan,.
- Homage to Ustad Bade Ghulam Ali Khan, Raagleela and Shadab released from Venus.
- Ustad Raza Ali Khan live in Karachi released by APMC.
Initially, she was under the guidance of Pt.
She also took vocal training from Ustad Munawar Ali Khan.
She joined the Ali Akbar College of Music at San Francisco, California in 1968.
She worked with many artists including Pandit Ravi Shankar, who invited her to sing on his Bangladesh benefit EP, Joi Bangla.
She is married to the tabla maestro Pandit Shankar Ghosh.
Her son is Bickram Ghosh, percussionist.
Sunayana Ghosh is an Indian percussionist.
Her instrument of choice is the tabla, the Indian hand drums.
As a female tabla player, she has performed in India as well as Europe, Armenia and Turkey.
Her very recent performance was aired by UK Radio.
New York city-based Tom Tom drum magazine for female drummers reported her music activities in its 5th issue.
Pandit Janardhan Mitta is a sitar player and Hindustani classical musician.
Pandit Janardhan Mitta was born on 12 May 1934, to a Telugu family in Hyderabad, India.
He began to play his sisters sitar after her marriage and began to teach himself to play the instrument.
Tutelage under Pandit Ravishankar.
He was invited the next day to play at the inauguration of the then new Sarathy Studios in Hyderabad.
This led to his first film compositions.
He moved to Chennai in January 1959 and became a mainstay of sitar compositions in the Chennai film industry.
This led on to his career in film composing.
The duo released a music album in 2004, titled Prashantham with the aim to promote peace and calm through their music.
Manjusha Kulkarni-Patil is an Hindustani classical music vocalist.
She belongs to the Gwalior gharana.
Manjusha Kulkarni-Patil was born in Sangli, Maharashtra, India on2nd Nov. 1971 in a family of musicians.
She started learning at the age of twelve from Chintubua Mhaiskar.
She is also a disciple of Pandit Kanebua and Ulhas Kashalkar.
Manjusha Kulkarni-Patil is known for her Khayal form of Hindustani music.
She performs at all major classical music festivals like Sawai Gandharva Bhimsen Festival, Tansen festival.
Aloke Dutta is an established Bengali tabla player.
Aloke has become an important figure in modern music, having taught some of the most influential drummers of our time.
He is very selective with his students.
His pupils include Danny Carey, Terry Bozzio, Pat Mastelotto, Joe Porcaro, Simon Phillips, Roy Wooten, Dave Timnick, and Aaron Harris.
In January 2008, Aloke Dutta suffered a massive heart attack while visiting his parents in India.
He underwent a complex and risky grafting bypass procedure.
Aloke has fully recovered and has returned to teaching full time.
In January 2011 he will begin teaching online.
The Maihar Band is an instrumental musical group in the Indian city of Maihar that performs both Indian and western music.
The ruling prince, Braj Nath Singh, cooperated and helped Allauddin Khan in procuring and preparing required instruments.
Artists and instruments.
Baobab tested each student and trained them to play a particular instrument.
He used jal tarang initially, but replaced it with Nal-tarang.
He trained some of the children to play western instruments including the piano, violin and cello with equal ease.
The first members of the Maihar band were :.
First Indian classical band.
Baba created several bandishes based on Indian Ragas.
He also taught western tunes to his students so that Europeans visiting the Court could be entertained.
He started with eighteen artists.
The band kept to the same number although after retirements, only ten artists remain.
Some of them gave solo recitals.
Present and future.
The band is associated with Department of Culture in Madhya Pradesh and the artists are government employees.
They perform at occasions in Maihar and sometimes in other cities.
The most common instrument for keeping rhythm in Hindustani music is the tabla, while in Carnatic music it is the mridangam.
Each repeated cycle of a tala is called an avartan.
However the most common Hindustani tala, Teental, is a regularly-divisible cycle of four measures of four beats each.
The first beat of any tala, called sam is always the most important and heavily emphasised.
The term talli, literally shift, is used to describe this offset in Tamil.
A tala does not have a fixed tempo and can be played at different speeds.
Tala in Carnatic music.
Carnatic music uses various classification systems of talas such as the Chapu, Chanda and Melakarta.
The Suladi Sapta Tala system is used here, according to which there are seven families of tala.
The seven tala families and the number of aksharas for each of the 35 talas are ;.
In practice, only a few talas have compositions set to them.
The most common tala is Chaturasra-nadai Chaturasra-jaati Triputa tala, also called Adi tala.
Nadai is a term which means subdivision of beats.
Many kritis and around half of the varnams are set to this tala.
Other common talas include :.
Strokes in tala.
The Suladi Saptha Tala system uses three of six possible angas in different arrangements ;.
Each tala can incorporate one of five jatis.
For example one cycle of khanda-jati rupaka tala comprises a 2-beat dhrutam followed by a 5-beat laghu.
cycle is thus 7 aksharas long.
For Misra-jati Khanda-jati Rupaka tala, it would be 7 x 7 = 49 matra.
The number of maatras in an akshara is called the nadai.
This number can be 3, 4, 5, 7 or 9, and take the same name as the jatis.
The default nadai is Chatusram :.
In addition, pallavis are often sung in chauka kale, although this trend seems to be slowing.
Tala in Hindustani music.
Various Gharanas also have their own preferences.
For example, the Kirana Gharana uses Ektaal more frequently for Vilambit Khayal while the Jaipur Gharana uses Trital.
Jaipur Gharana is also known to use Ada Trital, a variation of Trital for transitioning from Vilambit to Drut laey.
The khali is played with a stressed syllable that can easily be picked out from the surrounding beats.
Some rare talas even contain a half-beat.
This talas 6th beat does not have a played syllable - in western terms it is a rest.
Common Hindustani talas.
Some talas, for example Dhamaar, Ek, Jhoomra and Chau talas, lend themselves better to slow and medium tempos.
Others flourish at faster speeds, like Jhap or Rupak talas.
There are many taals in Hindustani music, some of the more popular ones are :.
Rarer Carnatic talas.
Other than these 35 talas there are 108 so-called anga talas.
The following is the exhaustive pattern of beats used in constructing them.
Compositions are rare in these lengthy talas.
They are mostly used in performing the Pallavi of Ragam Thanam Pallavis.
Some examples of anga talas are :.
Simhanandana tala : It is the longest tala.
Another type of tala is the chhanda tala.
These are talas set to the lyrics of the Thirupugazh by the Tamil composer Arunagirinathar.
He is said to have written 16000 hyms each in a different chhanda tala.
Of these, only 1500-2000 are available.
S. D. Burman.
Sachin Dev Burman was an Indian music composer.
He was one of the most well-renowned Bollywood music directors.
S D Burman composed music for 100 movies, including Hindi and Bengali films.
Apart from being a versatile composer, he also sang songs in the folk style of Tripura.
His Son Rahul Dev Burman was also a music director.
Mukesh and Talat Mahmood have also sung songs composed by him.
He also sang about 20 film songs.
Sachin was the youngest of the five sons of his parents, who had nine children in all.
This was followed by training from Kahifa Badal Khan, Sarangi player, and Ustad Allauddin Khan.
S D Burman also did a singing role in Urdu film Selima and another role in Dhiren Gangulis film, Bidrohi.
He made his film debut singing in Yahudi ki Ladki but the songs were scrapped and re-sung by Pahari Sanyal.
His first film as a singer was finally Sanjher Pidim.
The song Mera Sundar Sapna Beet Gaya sung by Geeta Dutt was his breakthrough song into the film industry.
Fortunately, he was dissuaded from doing so.
In addition, he gave music for Munimji and Paying Guest.
The songs sung by Mohammed Rafi and Kishore Kumar became popular.
Burman da composed the music for Dev Anand s production company Navketan s first film Afsar.
Baazis jazzy musical score revealed a new facet of singer Geeta Dutt, who was mainly known for melancholy songs and bhajans.
He also wrote music for the Guru Dutt classics - Pyaasa and Kaagaz Ke Phool.
The soundtrack of Devdas was also composed by him.
House No. 44, Funtoosh, and Solva Saal were other S D Burman hits.
The team of S D Burman, Kishore Kumar, Asha Bhosle and lyricist Majrooh Sultanpuri became popular for their duet songs.
Ill health caused a slump in his career in the early 1960s but he gave many hit films in late 1960s.
They reconciled their differences and started working again in 1962.
This song is based on a Bengali composition by Kazi Nazrul Islam, Aruno-kaanti ke go jogi bhikaari, based on raga bhairavi.
Other S D Burman hits from this period were Bandini and Ziddi.
Aradhana is considered a landmark score in the Bollywood history.
The music of the movie shaped the careers of singer Kishore Kumar, lyricist Anand Bakshi, filmmaker Shakti Samanta and R.D. Burman.
For the song Mere Sapno ki raani, Sachin Dev made R.D play the mouth organ.
Dev Anand and S D Burman continued their musical partnership in Prem Pujari.
S D Burman was a frank and outspoken man, with a strong sense of self-pride.
He openly criticised people whom he disliked or whose abilities he suspected.
Tere Mere Sapne, Sharmeelee, Abhimaan, Prem Nagar, Sagina, Chupke Chupke, and Mili are other classics from this period.
S D Burman went into a coma soon after rehearsing the song Badi sooni sooni for the film Mili.
He died on 31 October 1975 in Mumbai.
Relationship With Kishore Kumar.
Sachin Da was the only composer who had used both Kishore and Rafi in almost equal number of songs.
He regarded Kishore as his second son.
Kishore confessed that it was Sachin Da, who had given him the first chance.
, and the song is considered as one of the best songs of Kishore Kumar.
The Indian cricketer Sachin Tendulkar was named after the composer by Sachins grandfather, who was an ardent fan of Burman.
The singer and mimicry artist Sudesh Bhonsle frequently parodies the nasal high-pitched voice and quixotic singing style of S. D. Burman.
Burman paired with tabla maestro late Brajen Biswas for his Bengali songs.
All the thekas are according to the mood of the songs.
The CD from Raga Music was released at Kolkata Press Club.
The CDs are available in M. Biswas & Symphony.
Burman had a unique style of composing film songs.
He was very fond of Paan and would not share the same with anybody.
Vishnu Narayan Bhatkhande.
During those earlier times, the art had undergone several changes, rendering the raga grammar documented in scant old texts outdated.
Ragas used to be classified into Raga, Ragini, and Putra.
Bhatkhande reclassified them into the currently used Thaat system.
He noted that several ragas did not conform to their description in ancient Sanskrit texts.
He explained the ragas in an easy-to-understand language and composed several bandishes which explained the grammar of the ragas.
He borrowed the idea of lakshan geet from the Carnatic music scholar Venkatamakhin.
Vishnu Narayan Bhatkhande was born in 1860, into a Chittapawan Brahmin family in Walkeshwar, Mumbai.
He was educated at Elphinstone College in Mumbai and Deccan College in Pune.
He graduated with a degree in Law in 1885 and joined the legal profession in 1887.
Later he served a short stint as a lawyer in the High Court in Karachi.
During his college days, Bhatkhande began learning sitar playing from Vallabhdas.
He later learned vocal music from Raojiba, a Dhrupad singer.
He also trained in other aspects of classical music under Belbagkar, Ali Husain Khan, and Vilayat Hussain Khan.
He became a member of Gayan Uttejak Mandali, a musical circle in Mumbai.
Research in music.
Bhatkhande traveled throughout India, meeting with ustads and pandits, and researching music.
He began the study of ancient texts such as the Natya Shastra and Sangeet Ratnakara.
During his travels in India, he spent time in Baroda, Gwalior, and Rampur.
In Rampur he was the disciple of legendary Veena Player Ustad Wazir Khan, the descendant of Miyan Tansen.
Bhatkhandes first published work, Swar Malika, was a booklet containing detailed descriptions of all prevalent ragas.
In 1909, he published Shri Mallakshaya Sangeetam, in Sanskrit, under the pseudonym Chatur-pandit.
These volumes form today the standard text on Hindustani music, an indispensable starting point for any student of Hindustani Classical Music.
His disciple S N Ratanjankar, famous musician Shri.
His notation system became standard and though later scholars like Pt.
V. D. Paluskar, Vinayak Narayan Patwardhan and Pt.
Omkarnath Thakur introduced their improved versions, it remained a publishers favorite.
A recently developed notation system Ome Swarlipi follows the logical structure introduced by Pt.
Bhatkhande but uses symbols instead of Devanagari alphabets.
Bhatkhande wrote all of his works under one of the two pseudonyms, Vishnu Sharma and Chaturpandit.
Bhatkhande started schools and colleges in India for systematic teaching of Hindustani music.
The college was later renamed Bhatkhande College of Hindustani Music, and is now known as Bhatkhande Music Institute.
Bhatkhande prepared the Hindustani Sangeet Karmik Pustak Malika as a series of textbooks.
Bhatkhande suffered paralysis and a thigh fracture in 1933.
He died in 1936 on Ganesh Chaturthi day.
Shock Wave Flash is useful to create multimedia presentation.
Bhatkhandes notation, moving cursor and voice track can be synchronized to obtain swf file.
Tori Amos is an American pianist, singer-songwriter and composer.
She is a classically trained musician and possesses a mezzo-soprano vocal range.
As of 2005, Amos had sold 12 million albums worldwide.
She has been nominated for several awards, including 8 Grammy Award nominations.
Amos is the third child of Rev. Dr. Edison and Mary Ellen Amos.
When she was two, her family moved to Baltimore, Maryland, where she began to play the piano.
Her scholarship was discontinued at age 11 and she was asked to leave.
At the age of 13 she began playing at gay bars and piano bars, chaperoned by her father.
Y Kant Tori Read.
Following the albums commercial failure and the groups subsequent disbanding, Amos began working with other artists as a backup vocalist.
It was the only song recorded by the band, and its only commercial release was in the film.
Early solo career.
The initial recordings were declined by the label, which Amos felt was because the album had not been properly presented.
This album became her commercial and artistic breakthrough.
Her third solo album, Boys for Pele, was released in January 1996.
The underlying themes of both albums deal with womanhood, and Amoss own miscarriages and marriage.
Reviews for From the Choirgirl Hotel were mostly favorable and praised Amoss continued artistic originality.
That idea grew into Strange Little Girls, released in September 2001, one year after giving birth to her daughter.
The album is Amoss first concept album, with artwork featuring Amos photographed in character of the women portrayed in each song.
Epic Records years.
With her Atlantic contract fulfilled after a 15-year stint, Amos signed to Epic in late 2001.
In October 2002, Amos released Scarlets Walk, another concept album.
Described as a sonic novel, the album explores Amoss alter ego, Scarlet, intertwined with her cross-country concert tour following 9/11.
The album had a strong debut, demonstrating that Amoss fan base remained intact through the label change.
However, Scarlets Walk is Amoss last album to date to reach certified gold status from the RIAA.
Amos released two more albums with the label, The Beekeeper and American Doll Posse.
Both albums received mixed reviews, some of which stated that the albums suffered from being too long.
The Beekeeper was conceptually influenced by the ancient art of beekeeping, which she considered a source of female inspiration and empowerment.
Musically and stylistically, the album saw Amos return to a more confrontational nature.
Like its predecessor, American Doll Posse debuted at No. 5 on the Billboard 200.
The album debuted in the top 10 of the Billboard 200, making it Amoss seventh album to do so.
Continuing her distribution deal with Universal Republic, Amos released Midwinter Graces, her first seasonal album, in November of the same year.
The album features reworked versions of traditional carols, as well as original songs written by Amos.
The set was released exclusively through toriamos.com and only 2000 copies were produced.
Amos recorded the album with several musicians, including the Apollon Musagete string quartet.
The album, titled Gold Dust, was released in October 2012 through Deutsche Grammophon.
One of the first artists signed is singer/songwriter, Lawrence Casey.
It premiered at Londons Royal National Theatre and will run until February 2014.
Rosalie Craig won the Best Musical Performance category.
On November 25, 2013, it was announced that Tori Amos 14th studio album album is entitled Unrepentant Geraldines.
Dates in the US and the rest of the world will follow later in 2014 and will be confirmed soon.
The new album will be released on Mercury Classics internationally and on Mercury Classics/Universal Music Classics in the US.
Released in conjunction with The Beekeeper, Amos co-authored an autobiography with rock music journalist Ann Powers entitled Piece by Piece.
Image Comics released Comic Book Tattoo, a collection of comic stories, each based on or inspired by songs recorded by Amos.
Tori Amos : In the Studio by Jake Brown features an in-depth look at Amoss career, discography and recording process.
Trier-Bieniek focused on Amoss female fans and the emotional support they receive from listening to Amoss music.
It also discusses the feminist themes in Tori Amoss songwriting/persona.
She wrote the foreword to his collection ; he in turn wrote the introduction to Comic Book Tattoo.
Amos married English sound engineer Mark Hawley on February 22, 1998.
The family divides their time between Sewalls Point in Florida, Kinsale in Ireland, and Cornwall in England.
Amos made the ceremonial first call to launch the hotline.
Amos, herself a survivor of sexual assault, became the first national spokesperson for the organization.
On August 18, 2013 a concert in honor of her 50th birthday was held, an event which raised money for RAINN.
In 2003, Amos was voted fifth best touring act by the readers of Rolling Stone magazine.
Her concerts are notable for their changing set lists from night to night.
Awards and nominations.
Amos was inducted into the North Carolina Music Hall of Fame on October 11, 2012.
The Sounds of India.
The Sounds of India is a 1968 LP album by Hindustani classical musician Ravi Shankar.
It was digitally remastered and released in CD format by Columbia Records in 1989.
Narayan was born near Udaipur and learned to play the sarangi at an early age.
He studied under sarangi players and singers and, as a teenager, worked as a music teacher and traveling musician.
All India Radio, Lahore, hired Narayan as an accompanist for vocalists in 1944.
After an unsuccessful attempt in 1954, Narayan became a concert solo artist in 1956, and later gave up accompaniment.
He recorded solo albums and began to tour America and Europe in the 1960s.
Narayan taught Indian and foreign students and performed, frequently outside of India, into the 2000s.
He was awarded Indias second highest civilian honour, the Padma Vibhushan, in 2005.
Ram Narayan was born on 25 December 1927 in Amber village, near Udaipur in northwestern India.
Narayans first language was Rajasthani and he learned Hindi and, later, English.
Narayans father later encouraged him to leave school and devote himself to playing the sarangi.
Mattoo instead employed Narayan as a sarangi player.
Narayan was allowed sporadic solo performances on AIR and began to consider a solo career.
After the partition of India in 1947, Narayan moved to Delhi and played at the local AIR station.
His work for popular singers increased his repertoire and knowledge of styles.
As an accompanist for vocalists, Narayan showed his own talent and came to the foreground.
Other tabla players and singers, including Omkarnath Thakur and Krishnarao Shankar Pandit, expressed admiration for Narayans playing.
The Mumbai film industry offered a good salary and obscurity for work that would have lowered his stature among classical musicians.
He was considered a desired choice of film music director O. P. Nayyar.
Narayan performed in Afghanistan in 1952 and in China in 1954 and was well received in both countries.
Narayan pondered giving up the sarangi and becoming a singer.
He has since performed at the major music festivals of India.
Narayan later gave up accompaniment ; this decision carried a financial risk because interest in solo sarangi was not yet substantial.
After sitar player Ravi Shankar successfully performed in Western countries, Narayan followed his example.
The European tour included performances in France, Germany, sponsored by the Goethe-Institut, and at the City of London Festival, England.
Beginning in the 1960s, Narayan often taught and gave concerts outside of India.
On his Western tours he encountered interest in the sarangi because of its similarity to cello and violin.
The tabla player Suresh Talwalkar became a frequent accompanist for Narayan in the late 1960s.
During the early 1980s he typically spent months each year visiting Western nations.
Narayan performed less frequently in the 2000s and rarely in the 2010s.
The gat section includes one or two parts with compositions.
He uses his left hand for runs and to play an extended melodic range, and his right hand for rhythmic accentuations.
Narayan is associated with the Kirana gharana through Abdul Wahid Khan, but his performance style is not strongly connected to it.
Most of Narayans compositions are from the singing repertoire of his teachers and were modified and adapted to the sarangi.
He has created original compositions and in performance varies those he was taught.
Narayan disfavors the creation of new ragas, but developed compound ragas, including those of Nand with Kedar and Kafi with Malhar.
He plays on foreign harp strings to produce a clearer tone.
Narayan experimented with modifications to his instrument and added a fourth string, but removed it because it hindered playing.
Contributions and recognition.
Narayan privately trained sarangi players, including his daughter Aruna Narayan Kalle, his grandson Harsh Narayan, and Vasanti Srikhande.
He also taught sarod players, including his son Brij Narayan, as well as vocalists and a violinist.
Narayan argued that appreciation of the sarangi and him came only after acknowledgment by the Western audience.
Narayan received the national awards Padma Shri in 1976, Padma Bhushan in 1991, and Padma Vibhushan in 2005.
The Padma Vibhushan, Indias second highest civilian honor, was presented by Indian President A. P. J. Abdul Kalam.
He also received the Maharashtra Gaurav Puraskar, the Shiromani Award, the Rajasthan Welfare Association Award, and in 2013 the Rajasthan Ratna.
The biographical film Pandit Ramnarayan - Sarangi Ke Sang was shown at the 2007 International Film Festival of India.
Family and personal life.
Lal studied under tabla teachers in his youth, but later turned to farming.
When Lal died in October 1965, Narayan had difficulty performing and struggled with alcoholism, but overcame the addiction after two years.
Narayan assisted his brothers four children after their fathers death.
Chatur Lals son, Charanjit Lal Biyavat, is a tabla player and has toured Europe with Narayan.
Narayans wife Sheela, a homemaker, came to Mumbai in the 1950s and they had four children.
She died prior to 2001.
She was the first woman to give a solo sarangi concert and immigrated to Canada in 1984.
Brij Narayans son, Harsh Narayan, plays the sarangi.
He is based in Mumbai.
Collin Walcott was a North American musician.
He was a student of Ravi Shankar and Vasant Rai.
Collin expanded the role of the sitar in western music.
Walcott studied music and ethnomusicology at Indiana University in Bloomington, Indiana, and at The University of California at Los Angeles.
He was a member of the Paul Winter Consort and the groups Oregon and Codona.
In 1981 he performed at the Woodstock Jazz Festival, held in celebration of the tenth anniversary of the Creative Music Studio.
Walcott was killed in an automobile accident in East Germany during a 1984 Oregon concert tour.
David Amram :.
Irwin Bazelon :.
Bobby Callender :.
Don Cherry :.
Larry Coryell :.
David Darling :.
Miles Davis :.
Steve Eliovson :.
Rachel Faro :.
Cyrus Faryar :.
Egberto Gismonti :.
Tim Hardin :.
Richie Havens :.
Dave Liebman :.
Alan Lorber Orchestra :.
Meredith Monk :.
Jim Pepper :.
Vasant Rai :.
The Rainbow Band :.
Alla Rakha Khan :.
Buddy Rich :.
Stephen Roane :.
Tony Scott :.
Kathy Smith :.
Titos Sompa :.
Ralph Towner with Glen Moore :.
Various Artists - compilation :.
Barry Wedgle :.
Elyse Weinberg :.
Paul Winter Consort :.
Milind Date is an Indian flutist and music composer who plays the bansuri.
He studied under Hariprasad Chaurasia and is known for his blowing technique and his playing of a variety of musical styles.
Early life and career.
At the age of 21, Date started learning flute from Ajit Soman in his hometown Pune.
In a year, he was learning from Hariprasad Chaurasia.
In 1998, Date started a world Music band - Fusion Ensemble.
Date performed over 2000 Indian classical, fusion and world music concerts.
Date is part of Orientillica - the World Music Ensemble and recorded several albums released in Korea.
He experimented with several music and dance forms through his performances and recordings.
Date produced and composed an album called The Earth Concerto with musicians from Iran, Iraq, Korea, Israel, Morocco and India.
Date produced the mainstream American pop music album Fantasy for the New York based singer, Angeli.
Prayer from the Heart, a meditation album, was released by Polyglobe Music Austria.
For this album Milind has collaborated with Tanmayo, a Scottish singer and violinist, and Shubhangi, an Indian singer.
In 2010 produced his first ever album of devotional Marathi songs Krishna Gaan.
Singers like Suresh Wadkar and Shubhangi Gokhale-Joshi have sung the songs.
This album went into private circulations and thousands of copies have been distributed free by many.
Date has recently launched his another live production Milind Date Experience and has been touring with it for last two seasons.
Already performed more than 100 concerts, this group shall be touring abroad soon.
After Fusion Ensemble Date went in Keyboards sound more than the previous Guitar sound for his live performances.
They have traveled extensively in India in about 500 concerts in last 3 years.
Currently Date is on his round the world tour.
After USA now he is performing in South Korea.
This is his 11th performance tour to South Korea.
Ustad Bahadur Khan was a sarod player.
Early Life & Family.
He also practiced vocal music and earned many gold medals for his performances.
He was later guided in Sarode by his senior cousins Ustad Ali Akbar Khan and Shrimati Annapurna Devi for long time.
Ustad Bahadur Khan was one of the three celebrated musician sons of the great maestro Ustad Ayet Ali Khan.
Kirit died in 2006.
His elder son Bidyut Khan is however still carrying his fathers legacy and spreading his style of playing sarod worldwide.
He visited Norway, Denmark, Italy, Sweden, Germany, Holland etc.in 2002 to perform in various Indian Classical Music Conferences and Concerts.
He was also a part-time lecturer in Indian Classical Instrumental Music at Rabindra Bharati University in Calcutta.
In 1989 he also participated in the prestigious Dover Lane Music Conference.
Participants in this conference include many luminaries of the Indian Classical Music.
Music & Accomplishments.
Ustad Bahadur Khan was a regular performer at the All India Radio, Radio Pakistan, and Radio Bangladesh.
He composed and directed music for many films of the legendary Indian filmmaker Ritwik Ghatak.
He received the best music director award for Ritwik Ghataks film Subarnarekha.
His eminent disciples include Bidyut Khan, Shahadat Hossain Khan, Tejendranarayan Majumdar, Kalyan Mukherjee, and -LSB- http://www.monojshankar.com/ Monoj Shankar.
All of them are acclaimed classical musicians who spread through their music the legacies of Ustad Bahadur Khan.
Shahadat Hossain Khan has been awarded the Ekushey Padak, Bangladeshs highest civilian honour, for his contribution to classical music, in 1994.
Gulubhai Jasdanwalla was a Hindustani Classical vocalist of the Jaipur-Atrauli Gharana and one of the foremost disciples of Gharana founder Utd.
He was a successful importer-exporter in Mumbai.
Manji Khan taught him the Jaipur-Atrauli Gayaki until his death in 1937, at which point his father Utd.
Alladiya Khan continued.
Because of his financial success, Gulubhai Jasdanwalla was able to dedicate ample time for music and became a skilled musician.
Gulubhai Jasdanwalla produced many successful disciples, including Baba Azizuddin Khan, Smt.
Shruti Sadolikar, and his foremost being Pt.
Recordings of Gulubhai Jasdanwallas private performances have been kept by friends and colleagues.
Ka Karoon Sajni Aye Na Baalam.
Ka Karoon Sajni Aye Na Baalam is a classical song of Hindustani classical music.
It is a Thumri sung in the raaga, Sindh Bhairavi Thumri.
It was part of the Hindi film, Swami, sung by Yesudas under the music direction of Rajesh Roshan.
Yesudas was also nominated for the 1978 Filmfare Award for Best Male Playback Singer for the song.
This tradition had roots in Afghan rubab playing and was heavily influenced by the dhrupad vocal genre.
From 1926, he became Professor of Sarod at the Bhatkhande Music Institute after his performances impressed Vishnu Narayan Bhatkhande.
He played for a time in the orchestra of Leila Sokhey, who founded the Menaka Indian Ballet Company.
He toured Europe with Menaka in the period 1935-8 and gave many recitals.
He was also responsible for identifying the talent of singer Begum Akhtar and encouraging her early training.
He continued teaching at the Bhatkhande Institute until his death in 1955.
Padma Talwalkar is an Indian classical vocalist.
Padma Talwalkar was born in Mumbai, India.
She received training in Khyal gayaki in three main styles or gharanas : Gwalior, Kirana and Jaipur.
Padma Talwalkar is married to well known tabla maestro Pt.
Their son Satyajit Talwalkar and daughter Savani Talwalkar are also tabla players.
Shujaat Husain Khan is an Indian musician and sitar player of the Imdadkhani gharana.
He also sings frequently.
His style of sitar playing, known as gayaki ang, aims to imitate the human voice.
Born in Calcutta, Shujaat Khan is the son of legendary sitar player Ustad Vilayat Khan.
He has a brother, sitarist Hidayat Khan and sisters sufi singer, Zila Khan and Yaman Khan.
His approach to rhythm is largely intuitive, fresh and spontaneous, always astonishing his audiences.
In a special performance, he also played at the United Nations in the Assembly Hall, Geneva.
In the summer of 1999, he was the featured soloist with the Edmonton Symphony Orchestra.
Their album, Rain, was nominated for a Grammy award in 2004.
One of the best remembered collaborations of the year 2009-2010 happens to be Melange.
Shujaat Khan has over 100 musical releases on a variety of international labels ; and a video called Khandan.
Sabrang Utsav is an Indian classical music festival, started by Malti Gilani in memory of his teacher Bade Ghulam Ali Khan.
The festival has been held every year since 1968.
Maestro Kala Ramnath, is an Indian classical violinist.
She belongs to the Mewati gharana.
She was awarded the Rashtriya Kumar Gandharva Sanman in 2008 and the Pandit Jasraj Gaurav Puraskar in 1999.
Kala Ramnath is the first child of Malathy and T.N. Mani in Chennai, India.
Her father, T.N. Mani was a musician, well-known for his contributions to Indian film music.
She represents the beginning of the seventh generation of violinists in her family.
It has been said that her grandfather bribed her to practice by offering her sweets and candy.
She started performing from the age of 14 when her aunt presented her in concert.
This irked young Ramnath, who was interested in leaving her mark in the musical world.
For fifteen years she studied with the Mewati vocal maestro, Pandit Jasraj.
This has brought a rare vocal emotionalism to her art.
Her violin playing is characterized by an immaculate bowing and fingering technique, command over laya, richness and clarity in sur.
Kala regularly lectures and conducts workshops all around the world.
Sureshbabu Mane was a prominent Hindustani classical music singer of Kirana Gharana in India.
He was the son of a doyen of Kirana Gharana, Ustad Abdul Karim Khan.
Early life and training.
Sureshbabu was born as Abdul Rehman to Kirana Gharana master Ustad Abdul Karim Khan and Tarabai Mane.
Ustad Abdul Karim Khan was the court musician in Baroda when Tarabai was young, and he taught her music.
In their adult lives, the five respectively became known as Sureshbabu Mane, Krishnarao Mane, Hirabai Badodekar, Kamalabai Badodekar, and Saraswati Rane.
Sureshbabu had his initial training from his father, and later training from the doyen of Kirana Gharana, Ustad Abdul Wahid Khan.
Along with performing in concerts he also have performed in several Marathi plays, and movies.
Though not an accomplished actor, he acted in stage plays in the theatrical company formed by his younger sister Hirabai Barodekar.
He appeared in plays like Sanyasa-kallol in the role of Ashwin Sheth and Subhadra, where played the lead of Arjun.
He also played instruments like tabla and harmonium.
Artists like Pandit Bhimsen Joshi, Dr. Vasantrao Deshpande were influenced by Sureshbabus music.
Few of Sureshbabus recordings are available today.
He died February 15, 1953 in Pune.
Sureshbabu was an exceptionally expert in Khyal, Thumri, Marathi Natya Sangeet, and Bhajan.
his singing was intelligent, tuneful, aesthetically rich, tender and balanced.
his sweet tone was the life of his singing.
Deep yet delicate, it felt like a feather stroking the skin.
his phrases were always rounded with neatly drawn curves and were laced with aesthetic embroidery through kan and khatkas.
His singing appeared to be very simple and easy, yet it was extremely difficult to imitate.
He sang intricate phrases with such ease that one would seldom notice their complexity.
He use to say sing in such a way that after concert, your music eludes the memory of your audience.
His thumri singing was legendary and many artists have taken inspiration from that.
Hirabai Badodekar and Dr. Prabha Atre, two well-known classical music singers were among his important disciples.
Suresh Talwalkar is an Indian musician who plays the percussion instrument tabla.
Talwalkar was born 1948 in Mumbai and initially learned playing the tabla from his father Dattatrey Talwalkar.
He taught tabla players, including Vijay Ghate, and Western drummers.
Talwalkar was awarded the All India Radio Award in 1966 and the Sangeet Natak Akademi Award for 2004.
He received the Padma Shree Award in 2013.
Natural Elements is a studio album by the world fusion band Shakti.
It was released in 1977 on CBS Records.
Karekar is also an All India Radio artist.
He was initiated in classical music by Suresh Haldankar.
The famous exponents Jitendra Abhisheki and C. R. Vyas guided him later.
Karekar is an All India Radio artiste.
He has participated in many Radio Sangeet Sammelans and National programs at various centers in India.
Karekar has received several awards, one of them being the Lata Mangeshkar Award instituted by Lata Mangeshkar.
He has also participated in the international festivals like UMBRIA '98 in Italy.
Karekar is the founder and chairman of Swaraprabha Trust, which aims to work for promoting Indian Classical Music.
Khan belongs to the Sainia Gharana.
The credit of introducing the Sarangi to American and European audiences goes to Khan.
He has many Grandsons either learning to or playing musical instruments : Sohail, Faisal, Shariq, Junaid and Nabeel.
Awards and honour.
Khan received several national awards, including the Padma Shri in 1992 and the Padma Bhushan in 2006.
Keshav Sathe was an Indian tabla player, best known for his contributions to the Indo-jazz fusion genre.
He worked with visiting Indian sitarist Bhaskar Chandavarkar, and in 1961 they played together with the harmonica virtuoso Larry Adler.
This was Sathe 's first contact with jazz.
In 1967 he was invited with his trio to join the trio of jazz pianist Irene Schweizer.
They appeared at the Donaueschingen Festival and Berlin Jazz Tage.
The album  Jazz Meets India  was recorded in Villingen.
From 1970-73 he worked and toured with Julie Felix and Danny Thompson.
With the singer Alisha Sufit and group, he made the record  Magic Carpet.
From 1965-1993 he regularly accompanied the late singer/dancer Surya Kumari in recitals and teaching workshops.
He appears on Suns of Arqa s live album Musical Revue which was recorded in Manchester in 1982.
Apart from these, Kesh has made numerous incidental recordings, worked for television, radio, and taught tabla until 2003.
With Joe Harriott and John Mayer.
With Irene Schweizer.
Ustad Amir Khan was a well-known Indian classical vocalist.
He is considered one of the most influential figures in Hindustani classical music, and the founder of the Indore Gharana.
Early life and background.
Amir Khan was born in a family of musicians in Indore, India.
His grandfather, Change Khan, was a singer in the court of Bahadurshah Zafar.
Amir Alis mother died when he was nine years old.
He had a younger brother, Bashir, who became a sarangi player at the Indore station of All India Radio.
He was initially trained in the sarangi by his father.
However, seeing his interest in vocal music, his father gradually devoted more time to vocal training, focusing on the Merukhand technique.
Also, he learnt the basics of tabla playing from one of his maternal uncles, who was a tabla player.
These initial performances were not well received.
Amir Khans father died in 1937.
Later, Khansahib lived for some time in Delhi and Calcutta, but after the partition of India he moved back to Bombay.
He often used the taals Jhoomra and Ektaal, and generally preferred a simple theka from the tabla accompanist.
He had a rich baritone voice with a three-octave range.
His performances had an understated elegance, reverence, restrained passion and an utter lack of showmanship that both moved and awed listeners.
Amir Khan helped popularize the tarana, as well as khyalnuma compositions in Persian.
Sometimes he had a subdued harmonium accompaniment, but he almost never used the sarangi.
Characteristics of his style include :.
This attempt to introduce classical music to the masses through films significantly boosted Khansahibs visibility and popularity.
He also sang a ghazal Rahiye Ab Aisi Jagah for a documentary on Ghalib.
Although he referred to his style as the Indore Gharana, he was a firm believer of absorbing elements from various gharanas.
Amir Khan was awarded the Sangeet Natak Akademi Award in 1967 and the Padma Bhushan in 1971.
Amir Khans first marriage was to Zeenat, sister of the sitar player, Ustad Vilayat Khan.
From this marriage, which eventually failed and ended in separation, he had a daughter, Farida.
His second marriage was to Munni Bai, who gave birth to a son, Ekram Ahmed.
Around 1965, Khansaheb married Raisa Begum, daughter of the thumri singer, Mushtari Begum of Agra.
With Raisa he had a son, Haider Amir, later called Shahbaz Khan.
Khansahib died a premature death in a car accident in Calcutta, and was buried at Calcuttas Gobra cemetery.
She is considered one of the preeminent representatives of Hindustani classical music.
Life and career.
Amonkar lost her voice for two years in the late 1950s for unknown reasons.
She sang for the 1990 Hindi film Drishti.
She has created many compositions for a number of ragas.
Kishori Amonkar has two sons Nihar and Bibhas with her husband Ravindra Amonkar.
She is sometimes also described as temperamental.
Amonkar lives in Mumbai.
Amonkar received the national awards Padma Bhushan in 1987 and Padma Vibhushan in 2002.
She was awarded the Sangeet Natak Akademi Award for 1985 and the Sangeet Natak Akademi Fellowship for 2009.
Setrak Sarkissian is a Lebanese tabla player.
His compositions and arrangements have been featured on over 30 recordings and movie soundtracks, including five with Farid al-Atrash.
Sarkissian was born in Beirut, Lebanon.
Not to be deterred, he continued to play and enrolled at the conservatory for further training.
His skill was immediately recognized, and Sarkissian excelled rapidly.
He continues to perform, record and teach.
He lives in the traditionally Armenian neighborhood of Bourj Hammoud and teaches workshops around the world, along with international performances.
Bismillah Khan was born on 21 March 1913 in Dumraon, Bihar in northern India.
He was the second son of Paigambar Khan and Mitthan.
His parents had initially named him Qamaruddin to rhyme with their first-born son Shamshuddin.
However, his grandfather, Rasool Bux Khan, the shehnai master of the court of Bhojpur, exclaimed Bismillah !.
at the sight of him and thereafter he came to be known by this name.
His ancestors were court musicians and used to play in Naqqar khana in the princely states of Bhojpur, now in Bihar.
His father was a shehnai player in the court of Maharaja Keshav Prasad Singh of Dumraon Estate, Bihar.
At the age of six, he moved to Varanasi.
He received his training under his uncle, the late Ali Baksh Vilayatu, a shehnai player attached to Varanasis Vishwanath Temple.
He also performed for spiritual master Prem Rawat.
Bismillah Khan was perhaps single-handedly responsible for making the shehnai a famous classical instrument.
He was credited with having almost monopoly over the instrument as he and the shehnai are almost synonyms.
He played shehnai to audience across the world.
On his death, as an honour, his shehnai was buried with him.
He was known for his vision of spreading peace and love through music.
Performances at Red Fort.
Khan had the rare honor of performing at Delhis Red Fort on the eve of Indias Independence in 1947.
His recital had become a cultural part of Indias Independence Day celebrations, telecast on Doordarshan every year on August 15.
After the prime ministers speech from Lal Qila in Old Delhi, Doordarshan would broadcast a live performance by the shehnai maestro.
This tradition dated from the days of Pandit Nehru.
Khan had a brief association with movies.
He played the shehnai for Rajkumar s role of Appanna in the Kannada movie Sanaadi Appanna.
He acted in Jalsaghar, a movie by Satyajit Ray and provided sound of shehnai in Goonj Uthi Shehnai.
Noted director Goutam Ghose directed Sange Meel Se Mulaqat, a documentary about the life of Khan.
Khan seldom accepted students.
On August 17, 2006, Khan was taken ill and admitted to the Heritage Hospital, Varanasi for treatment.
He died after four days on August 21, 2006 due to a cardiac arrest.
The Government of India declared a day of national mourning on his death.
Sangeet Natak Akademi, New Delhi, instituted the Ustad Bismillah Khan Yuva Puraskar in 2007, in his honour.
It is given to young artists in the field of music, theatre and dance.
Awards and recognitions.
Bismillah Khan had honorary doctorates from.
^ Life history of Bismillah Khan, the Legend of Varanasi.
Meeting a Milestone : Ustad Bismillah Khan.
A Documentary by Goutam Ghose, 1989.
Lucknow gharana, also known as Purab Gharana, is one of the six main gharanas or styles in tabla.
Among these upgrades, Gat and Paran are two types of compositions that are very common in Lucknow gharana.
Lucknow Gharana gave birth to two other Gharanas : Banaras and Farukhabad.
Deenanath Mangeshkar was a well-known Marathi theatre actor, a renowned Natya Sangeet musician and an exceptional Hindustani classical vocalist.
He was also popularly and reverentially addressed as Master Deenanath Mangeshkar.
Deenanath Mangeshkar, popularly known as Dina, was born at Mangeshi, Goa on 29 December 1900.
His fathers name was Ganesh Bhatt Abhisheki, who was a Brahmin and served as priest at.
the famous Mangueshi Temple, and his mother was Yesubai.
Yesubai Rane, his mother belonged to Devadasi, community of Goa,.
She occasionally sang at the temple festivals and had an erring genius for music.
Dinanath adopted the surname Mangeshkar which means from the village of Mangeshi in Marathi.
The father of the late Pandit Jitendra Abhisheki was Deenanath Mangeshkars half-brother.
Deenanath Mangeshkar started taking singing and music lessons from Shri Baba Mashelkar at the age of five.
He was also to become a disciple at Gwalior school.
He was fascinated by the variety & aggressive style of Gayanacharya Pt Ramkrishna bua Vaze and became gandabandh shagird.
In his youth, he traveled to Bikaner and took formal training in classical music from Pt.
Sukhdev Prasad, father of Pt.
Mani Prasad, of the Kirana Gharana.
He joined the Kirloskar Sangeet Mandali and the Kirloskar Natak Mandali at the age of 11.
Later, he left Kirloskar Mandali, and formed Balwant Mandali with his friends Chintamanrao Kolhatkar and Krishnarao Kolhapure.
This new group had Gadkaris blessing, but shortly after the group was formed, Gadkari died in January 1919.
Deenanaths good looks and melodious voice won him popularity on the Marathi theatre.
During the period of 1935, he produced 3 films, one of them being Krishnarjun Yuddha.
It was made in both Hindi and Marathi, and a song from it, sung by and filmed on Dinanath.
Dinanath also studied Indian classical music music under Ramkrishna Vaze.
He also studied astrology.
Examples : Ranadundubhi, Rajsanyas, Deshkantak.
Deenanaths first wife was Narmada.
She was the daughter of Seth Haridas Ramdas Lad - a prosperous businessman of the town of Thalner, Maharastra.
Dinanath and Narmada were married in 1922.
Dinanath changed his wifes name to Shrimati.
She was 19 at the time and Dinanath was 21.
They had a daughter named Latika, who died in her infancy.
Dinanaths wife died shortly after.
Deenanaths second wife was his first wifes sister.
Her name was Shevanti.
Some sources claim that Dinanath named his second wife Shrimati as well.
Some have her name as Shuddhamati.
The marriage of Deenanath and Shevanti was solemnised at a quiet ceremony within the house in 1927.
Shevantis mother chose not to attend.
Deenanath and his second wife had five children : Lata, Meena, Asha, Usha, and Hridaynath.
Their first child was named Hridaya.
But Deenanath called her Lata in memory of his deceased daughter.
The name stuck and it is by that name that his legendary eldest daughter, Lata Mangeshkar, is known today.
Shevanti was also called Mai at home.
Deenanath was determined to take his first step in his professional life with a distinctive surname.
So, he chose the last name Mangeshkar.
The surname was derived from name of his family deity - Shri Mangesh located at Mangeshi, Ponda, Goa.
Deenanath took to alcohol during the days of financial hardship in 1930s.
After being ill for a few weeks, he died in Pune in April 1942.
He was only 41 at the time his death.
His family has erected a Deenanath Mangeshkar Hospital and research center in his name in Pune.
Some of his theatrical productions, in which he sang and starred too, are.
Shrutinandan is an Indian classical music academy located in Kolkata, India.
It is run by vocalist, Pandit Ajoy Chakrabarty.
Shrutinandan was inaugurated on July 1997.
Its objective towards promotion of music and identifying young talent and training them on Hindustani music and Carnatic music.
The academy carries out research in Hindustani classical music in order to restore some of the undocumented works by the maestros.
Rash Behari Datta.
Rasbehari Datta was born in an illustrious family of intellectuals.
His late father Ranbir Singh Amar was a famous author, journalist and poet of the country.
His maternal grand father was a well known tabla player, who served both All India Radio Lahore and Jullundur.
His late father introduced him to music at the age of five.
Later he continued his study of sitar playing in the Patiala Gharana at Patiala, then at a music academy at Chandigarh.
He finally completed his training under Pandit Uma Shankar Mishra, the equally famous disciple of world renowned Pandit Ravi Shankar.
Apart from acquiring a bachelors degree in Arts, he is proficient in many languages such as Hindi, Urdu, Bengali and English.
Today he has carved a place for himself amongst the few leading sitar players of the present generation.
Apart from performing in all the prominent music festivals and music conferences throughout the country.
He has had the distinction of performing in the National Programme of Music by All India Radio and Doordarshan many times.
Achievements as composer.
He has comprised music for many T.V. serials and stage ballets including Gangavataran, a ballet he comprised in New York.
Dr. Vikas Kashalkar is a noted Hindustani classical vocalist, scholar, teacher and musicologist.
He has received training in the Gwalior, Jaipur and Agra gharanas.
He hails from a family with music tradition.
Dr. Kashalkar was born in Pandharkawada, Maharashtra.
He was initiated in music from his father N D Kashalkar, a lawyer by profession and a renowned musicologist and writer.
The tradition of Guru-shishya tradition plays an important role in Hindustani classical music.
Dr. Kashalkars singing reflects all the facets of systematic training : Talim ka Gana, in the language of the music connoisseurs.
Vikas Kashalkar worked as a Producer at Balbharati, Pune.
He retired from Balbharati and now teaches music along with performances all over India and abroad.
He regularly performs on Doordarshan & All India Radio.
Dr Kashalkar is a recognized guide for Hindustani Classical Vocal at Lalit Kala Kendra, University of Pune.
He also guides Phd students at S.N.D.T University and Akhil Bharatiya Gandharva Mahavidyalaya Mandal, Mumbai.
As a Musician.
Dr. Kashalkar 's guru Pandit Gajananrao Joshi a stalwart of Gwalior gharana had a long tradition of this gharana from Pt.
Balkrishnabua Ichalkaranjikar to Pt.
Anant Manohar Joshi to himself.
Along with Gwalior Gharana Gajananbuwa learnt from other gharanas viz.
Agra & Jaipur.
Vikas Kashalkar has melodious voice and intricacies of ` Tanas ' give immense joy to the listeners.
He has a large repertoire of uncommon and mixed ragas and he presents many of them with great mastery and ease.
Apart from Pandit Gajananrao Joshi, Pt.
Mallikarjun Mansur, Surashri Kesarbai Kerkar, Pt.
Bhimsen Joshi and Dr. Prabha Atre also influenced him.
His Tana patterns incorporate the behlaos peculiar to Jaipur style.
His tana patterns have different varieties like saral, vakra, bol tana, mukhbandi and so on.
He is also a composer of new bandishes.
His voice is distinctively known for quality, volume and vigor.
He is gifted with a mellifluous and flexible voice and tremendous ability to make an immediate impact on the audience.
Connoisseurs and common listeners alike enjoy his concerts.
He also effectively presents Thumris, Bhajans at times.
The effectiveness of his music is greatly enhanced by his joyous and amiable disposition.
He is also continuously involved in exploring new possibilities of Tana pattern.
He is certified  A  grade artist on All India Radio.
As a teacher.
Dr. Kashalkar strongly believes in sharing his wealth of knowledge to interested students.
He has teaching sessions almost every day in Pune.
He is closely associated with Shadjamadhyam, a web portal for teaching vocal music online.
He teaches music to students from USA, Europe and other countries.
Several of his students have already established themselves as concert vocalists.
Manjusha Patil, Aparna Gurav, Hrishikesh Ghangurde, Mukul Kulkarni & Matt Rahaim are few of them.
He is guide to PhD students of S.N.D.T University and Akhil Bharatiya Gandharva Mahavidyalaya Mandal, Mumbai.
He works as an examiner for PhD thesis in various centers like Aurangabad, Kolhapur and Amravati in Maharashtra India.
He is guest Lecturer for NET guidance workshop at SNDT, Pune.
Also works as a guide to Refresher Course for teachers, SNDT University, Pune.
A number of students are working for PhD under his guidance.
Many of his students have been awarded the  Sangeetacharya  Degree.
He has published many articles in news papers as well as in Magazines.
This was another fine facet of Vikas.
An Avarohana, Avarohanam or Avaroha, in the context of Indian classical music, is the descending scale of any raga.
The notes descend in pitch from the upper tonic down to the lower tonic, possibly in a crooked manner.
This raga in its avarohana has the notes jumping from one to another.
This changes the whole feel of the raga, making Sahana a beautiful to listen to Raga.
Pandit Padma Shree Siyaram Tiwari was an Indian classical singer and leading exponent of Dhrupad - genre of Hindustani classical music.
He belonged to the Darbhanga gharana and was based in Patna.
In 1971, he was awarded the Padma Shri by Government of India.
Early life and background.
Born in 1919 in Darbhanga, Bihar, he received his training in Dhrupad from his maternal grandfather, of Dharbhanga gharana.
Subsequently his learnt Khyal, Thumri and Bhajan genre from his father Baldev Tiwari.
His singing, gayaki was known for Swara, Meend, Gamak and Laykari.
Besides improvisation of complicated Chhand, which allowed him to move from one rhythm pattern to another.
He also performed in other genres such as Khyal, Thumri, Tappa and bhajan.
He was a leading performer at All India Radio, Patna.
Awards : Padma Shri in 1971, gold medal.
performed in concerts all over India, Europe, etc.
Tiwari died in 1998.
Vidyadhar Koparkar is a Hindustani classical singer.
Early life and education.
Vijay Koparkar started taking singing lessons at the age of eight.
He has a Master 's degree in Engineering from the College of Engineering, Pune and runs a small-scale manufacturing plant.
Vijay Koparkar has been trained by gurus belonging to different gharanas, and it reflects in his singing.
Vijay Koparkar has performed all over the world, including the USA, Canada, the Middle East, Paris and UK.
He performed twice at the prestigious ' Sawai Gandharva Music Festival ' held in Pune, India every year.
He is a graded artiste at All India Radio and Indian Television.
Vijay Koparkar has been imparting music lessons for many years.
Bandish Projekt is a musical act featuring a blend of Indian elements in an electronica format.
Bandish Projekt was formed in 1998 by Mayur Narvekar, Udyan Sagar, and Mehirr Nath Choppra.
Mayur was raised in Ahmedabad by a family of classical musicians and arts enthusiasts.
His father and paternal uncle introduced him to the dholak at an early age.
Through his interest and talent for percussion, he was encouraged to formally learn the tabla.
Mayur studied classical tabla with his guru Shri Divyang Vakil for 20 years.
He went on to win the All India Radio competition for percussion in 2000, and was honoured with the prestigious Pt.
Nikhil Ghosh Memorial Promising Artist Award in 2001.
Inspired by the music and producers of the West, Mayur began to add to his repertory of classical sounds.
Thus, his electronic act, Bandish Projekt, was conceived.
After several years as a live performer, composer and producer, Mayur moved to Mumbai in 2008.
Bandish Projekt released two EPs in 2012, I Am Not Alone and Correkt Remixed.
He was born in Comilla, East Bengal, British India in 1945.
He speaks the Bengali, English, Hindi, and Urdu languages.
His father was a government official who served in the distinguished position of Joint Secretary.
His nickname, Badal, was given to him by his grandfather after he began crying in the rain as a baby.
Roy received a masters degree in statistics.
He came to New York City in 1968 to work on a Ph.D.
He later settled in East Brunswick Township, New Jersey.
Roy began playing the tabla at age 10 or 11, under guidance from his maternal uncle in comilla.
In the 1990s Roy began performing with the Brazilian guitar duo Duofel.
He has also collaborated with Ken Wessel and Stomu Takeishi in a fusion trio named Alankar.
They currently have one album entitled Daybreak.
He often plays with Muruga Booker in the Global Village Ceremonial Band, and with Michael Wolff & Impure Thoughts.
In 2004, Roy worked with Richie Havens on the album The Grace of the Sun.
In addition to tabla, Roy also plays a variety of percussion instruments including shakers, bells, rain stick, and flexatone.
His notable students include Geoffrey Gordon.
In 2008, the album Miles From India, a tribute to Miles Davis on which Roy appeared, received a Grammy nomination.
Ahir Bhairav is a Hindustani classical raga.
Arohana and avarohana.
Pa and Sa are sometimes avoided in ascending.
Vadi and samavadi.
But Ga, Pa and Dha are also frequently sustained.
Pakad or Chalan.
S, r G M, G M r, n D, n r S. Organization and relationships.
Sometimes shuddha Ni is used in the lower octave to emphazise the Bhairav character.
The Carnatic music equivalent to this raga is Chakravakam.
Ahir Bhairav is typical uttarang raga, which means emphasis is on the upper tetrachord.
The second Prahar of the morning, around 6 - 9 AM.
Certain ragas have seasonal associations.
Wasif-ud-din Dagar, Music Today Cassette : A97015, ; Chalo sakhi braj raje.
Ravi Shankar, HMV LP, Three Classical Ragas 1957, free improvisation and Gat in Rapuktala.
entries due to :.
Abdul Rashid Khan.
Ustad Abdul Rashid Khan is a vocalist of Hindustani music genre.
he belongs to the musical tradition of Miya Tansen.
Apart from khayal, he sings dhrupad, dhamar and thumri with equal versatility.
His fathers elder brother Bade Yusuf Khan and his father initially trained him.
His father Chhote Yusuf Khan was his guru.
He further developed this style suiting his own artistic sensitivity.
Khans traditional compositions have been recorded by the BBC and Iraq Radio.
During the past several decades, he has been a regular performer on Akashvani and Doordarshan Lucknow.
Khan has composed more than two thousand compositions and is also a prolific writer and poet under the pseudonym Rasan Piya.
Many compositions that he sings are his own creations.
He has trained numerous students in his lifetime.
He is now a guru at ITC Sangeet Research Academy, Kolkata.
Awards and Recogonitions.
Tilwada or Tilwara is a tala of Hindustani music.
Like Tintaal, Tilwada tala also has 16 beats.
Tilwada is often used in Kheyal.
Cyclical series of equally periodical beats consisted of recurring claps and waves :.
or counted out as :.
This tala has the following arrangement :.
Vishwanathbuwa Jadhav, also referred as Proudh Gandharva or with title Pandit, was an Indian Hindustani classical khyal singer.
He was a celebrated disciple of Ustad Abdul Karim Khan, the founder of Kirana gharana.
He also took lessons from Ustad Nissar Hussein Khan of Gwalior gharana.
Jadhav was appointed as the darbar gayak of the former princely state of Kolhapur by Chhatrapati Shahu Maharaj in 1920s.
He had also been invited to perform on various occasions by Krishna Raja Wadiyar IV, the Maharaja of Mysore State.
In 1938, he was also bestowed with the title of Proudh Gandharva by Wadiyar.
He used to also perform at the royal functions of Sangli State.
Jadhav also composed music for films in the early talkie era.
He was the music composer of the 1937 film Gangavataran.
The film was written and directed by Dadasaheb Phalke s, who is known as the father of Indian cinema.
It was the first sound film and the last film to be directed by Phalke.
In 1938, he also composed music for the mythological film Dhurva Kumar based on Dhruva s story.
The film starred actors Kumar Prabhakar and Raja Paranjape.
Jadhav has three sons, Pandit B.V. Jadhav, Pandit R.V. Jadhav, Pandit P.V. Jadhav, who are also classical Hindustani singers.
At Nashik, they have setup and loom after the Pandit Vishwanathbuwa Jadhav Memorial Committee which promotes Hindustani music.
Jeffrey Scott Martin is a Canadian guitarist and singer-songwriter best known for fronting the rock band The Tea Party.
Martin began his career as a solo artist in October 2005, when The Tea Party disbanded.
Martin began playing guitar as a child and in his adolescence played in bands The Shadows, Modern Movement and The Stickmen.
In 1988, Jeff graduated from Sandwich Secondary School along with future Tea Party bandmates Jeff Burrows and Stuart Chatwood.
The Tea Party.
In 1993 The Tea Party signed to EMI Music Canada and released their first major label recording entitled Splendor Solis.
Martin employed open tunings to imitate Indian instruments such as the sitar, something he has continued to employ throughout his career.
It was very dark, extremely angry and you could only listen to it in a certain mindset.
I mean for me, going to where I went with Transmission, almost destroyed me.
Triptych followed in 1999 ; the first single Heaven Coming Down rose to # 1 on Canadian radio.
In October 2005, The Tea Party disbanded due to creative differences.
The band members regrouped in 2011 for a series of shows in their native Canada.
The success of these dates led to The Tea Party reforming permanently.
Martins debut solo album titled Exile and the Kingdom was released in Canada and Australia in 2006.
Among those who worked with Martin were Michael Lee and Ritesh Das.
The first single, titled The World is Calling, is an open letter to the Bush administration.
During this time Martin was supposed to collaborate with Scott Stapp but it did not ensue.
In November 2006, Martin released a live album recorded that September, titled Live in Brisbane 2006.
The two-disc album features Ritesh Das and the Toronto Tabla Ensemble, and consists of both solo and Tea Party songs.
In early 2008 Martin and Sheehy formed The Armada.
The bands debut album, which features a similar sound to the Tea Party, was released on 4 November 2008.
Jeff Martin 777.
On January 10, 2011, the title track from the album was released on Martins myspace page.
The Ground Cries Out was released in Canada on March 1, 2011 and has subsequently been released in Australia.
Following a Jeff Martin 777 Canadian tour, the band toured Australia from May 2011.
During the tour Martin announced a reunion of The Tea Party for some Canadian shows in July and August.
Following the success of those shows, The Tea Party announced the reunion was permanent.
As a record producer.
He also played upon Roy Harper s The Green Man.
Martin recently produced the new album for Australian dark rock band The Eternal called Under A New Sun.
The album features a duet with singer Mark Kelson on the track The Sleeper.
The song Daystar from Exile and the Kingdom was written for him.
June 19 2011, Jeff became a father for the second time to a baby boy with Byron Bay Photographer, Kate Nutt.
Martin maintains a studio in Byron Bay, Australia.
Ustad Abdus-Sattar Tari Khan is a Pakistani master tabla player and Vocalist.
Ustad Tari Khan was born in Lahore, Pakistan.
He hails from a traditional Rababi family.
His father was a classical vocalist.
At fourteen, he formally became a student of Ustad Shaukat Hussain Khan.
Three years later he performed at the death anniversary of tabla master Mian Qadir Baksh.
That solo performance earned him a revered place amongst the tabla greats.
He became famous as the accompanist of the ghazal singer Ghulam Ali.
Tari always provided an exquisite accompaniment : clean, crisp thekas with astonishingly quick and interesting laggis to punctuate the verses.
Since then, Tari has gone on to musical scene as a tabla showman.
Ustad Tari Khan has accompanied various classical artistes like Pt Jasraj, etc.
He has also accompanied renowned ghazal singers like Mehdi Hasan, Ghulam Ali, Hariharan, and Ustad Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan.
Recently, Ustadji has shown his prowess in the area of singing as well.
His mentor in singing was Mehdi Hasan Saab himself.
Ustad Tari Khan lives in California, US.
He trains his disciples in Tabla.
Asad Qizilbash is a Pakistani sarod player.
The discovery of his master 's live performance became the paradigm for his music.
Asad Qizilbash started learning violin when he was around 8 years old.
At 10 years age, he was asked to perform in a function patronized by UNICEF : The Universal Children Day, Islamabad.
It was his first public performance.
Asad Qizilbash became a performing member of the Childrens Art Workshop at the Pakistan National Council of Arts.
He was playing violin and the guitar.
He remained member of this workshop till 1982, when he left for the Middle East.
During those days he used to play daily at the workshop.
At that same period, he signed a contract with the Pakistan Television PTV.
Asad Qizilbash was selected with some other musicians to represent Pakistan at the Attaturk Festival, in Ankara.
He was playing violin and guitar.
This was an invitation from the Radio-Television authorities of Turkey.
The same year he met Ustad Amjad Ali Khan in Pakistan, for the first time.
1983 and 1984.
KASBEY QAMAL, a television serie by PTV where Asad Qizilbash performed the Sarod and violin.
PANGNAT, a television series by the PTV where Asad Qizilbash was performing for the musical background.
1990 and 1992.
Sarod concerts at the Tagore Institute in Bonn, Federal Republic of Germany.
Since his return to Pakistan in 1992, Asad Qizilbash is mainly playing the Sarod.
His talent is largely recognized and he has performed already in four Rag Rang.
These are very exclusive concerts reserved only for classical musicians of the highest level.
RASELAY LOG a television series by the PTV where Asad Qizilbash was performing sarod.
Asad Qizilbash performs live at the Marcus Mingus Jazz Club in Brussels, Belgium.
Asad performs for Peter Gabriel 's WOMAD in the UK.
Chinese Minister of Culture invites Asad to perform on the 7th Asia Art Festival in Foshan.
Asad also plays on the track Bodyless Friend by Sutrastore.
Asad Qizilbash signs a publishing, recording and production contract with womb Editions in Brussels.
Together with Andrew Goldberg and Pely, Asad recorded his first solo album, The Magic of the Sarod.
Surbahar, , sometimes known as bass sitar, is a plucked string instrument used in the Hindustani classical music of North India.
It is closely related to the sitar, but has a lower tone.
The instrument can emit frequencies lower than 20 Hz.
The surbahar is over 130 cm.
The neck is made out of tun, or teak wood.
It has four rhythm strings, four playing strings, and 15 to 17 unplayed sympathetic strings.
The sympathetic strings pass over the smaller bridge which is directly glued on the tabli.
Three plectrums are used to play the dhrupad style of alap, jor, and jhala on surbahar.
Some researchers believe that surbahar was invented around 1825.
Anant Lal, often referred to by the title Pandit, was an Indian classical musician and teacher who played the shehnai.
Lal was born in Varanasi, in the northern Indian province of Uttar Pradesh, in 1927.
Later, Lal became a student of thumri vocal teacher Pandit Mahadev Prasad Mishra of Varanasi.
In addition to the shehnai, Lal played bamboo flute, known as the bansuri.
Lal established himself as a staff artist for All India Radio, with whom he served until 1987.
Among his works as a performer and recording artist in India, he played with sitar virtuosos Ravi Shankar and Debu Chaudhuri.
Lals own recordings include Splendour in Shehnai, issued in 1990 on the T-Series record label.
Also a teacher, in the Benares gharana tradition, his students included modern shehnai players Shanjeev Shankar and Daya Shankar.
His grandson, Anand Shankar, also trained under Lal, before dedicating himself to the tabla.
In 1984, Lal received the Uttar Pradesh Sangeet Natak Akademi Award.
Five years later, he was honoured with a national Sangeet Natak Akademi Award, the highest recognition afforded artists in India.
Lal died on 3 March 2011, aged 84, from a heart attack.
Along with Daya Shankar, his musician sons include shehnai player Ashok Kumar and flautist Vijay Kumar.
Tansen Pande was a prominent Dhrupad singer.
He was born Husseinuddin Dagar, the youngest son of Allabande Khan.
His other three brothers, Nasiruddin, Rahimuddin and Imanuddin Khan Dagar, were also famous singers of Dhrupad style.
He decided to return to the familys original religion, became a Hindu, and took the name Tansen Pande.
His son Saeeduddin Dagar is a Dhrupad performer who resides in Pune in western India.
Rattan Mohan Sharma.
Rattan Mohan Sharma is an Indian classical vocalist.
He sings in Hindustani style of music.
He is anA grade artist on All India Radio.
Rattan Mohan Sharma was born in Rajasthan to Padma and Mohan Lal Sharma.
He is the nephew of classical vocalist, Pandit Jasraj.
He has performed solos in many concerts and festivals in India and abroad.
Also a successful music director and composer giving music to a number of tele-serials and private albums.
Rattan Mohan Sharma is married to Ekta Sharma and has a son, Swar Sharma.
Devotional albums include.
Vishwanath Rao Ringe.
Vishwanath Rao Ringe Tanarang born on 6 December 1922 was a Hindustani Classical Music vocalist and composer.
He belonged to Gwalior Gharana of Hindustani Classical Music.
He composed more than 2000 bandishs in about 200 ragaas, for which he has been enlisted in Limca Book of Records.
Ringe was the disciple of late Pandit Krishnarao Pandit of Gwalior gharana.
He started learning music from his childhood.
He received rigorous and intensive training and full guidance as a performer Khyal Gayakee, in Gwalior Gharana style.
In 1939, he established a music school named Bhartiya Sangeet Kala Mandir.
More than 2000 compositions in about 200 raagas, have been composed in various Talas.
Viz ... Ektal, Deepchandi, Tritala, Tilwada, Chanchar, Dadra, Keharva, Jhaptala, Ada-Choutal, Roopak etc.
Pt Ringe had himself composed a Raga Hemashri, which he has Rendered in All India Radio Programme.
His compositions include Bada Khyal, Chota Khyal, Chaturang, Tarana, Sadra, Sargam, Tillana, Sur Sagar.
Sur Sagar is a unique composition, in which the lyrics are same as the notes.
Ringe died at the age of 83 at his residence in Indore, Madhya Pradesh in 2005.
Awards and recognitions.
Limca Book of Records for Most Compositions in Year 1999 ; Page # 222.
Indo American Whos Who Vol II - for Most Compositions in Year 1999 ; Page # 493.
Reference Asia Vol II for Most Compositions in year 1986 ; Page # 143.
Indo European Whos Who Vol I for Most Compositions in year 1996 ; Page # 524.
Biography International Vol III and Vol IV for Most Compositions in year 1992 - Page # 810.
Sangeet Praveen from Shankar Gandharv Mahavidyalaya, Gwalior.
Sangeet Bhaskar from Shankar Gandharv Mahavidyalaya, Gwalior.
Limca Book of Records.
Indo American Whos Who Vol II.
New Delhi : FI Publication.
Reference Asia Vol II.
New Delhi : Rifacimento Organisation.
Indo European Whos Who Vol I. New Delhi : FI Publication.
Biography International Vol III and Vol IV.
New Delhi : South Asia Publication Company.
Dagar Gharana is a dhrupad-based stylized singing founded by Ustad Behram Khan.
Some of its popular present day vocalists are Gundecha Brothers.
An award Dagar Gharana Award was instituted in 1981.
Abdul Halim Jaffer Khan.
Abdul Halim Jaffer Khan is an Indian sitar player.
Khan received the national awards Padma Shri and Padma Bhushan and was awarded the Sangeet Natak Akademi Award for 1987.
He was born in 1929, in Jawra, Madhya Pradesh, as the son of Jaffer Khan, a versatile vocalist, sitarist and beenkar.
He hails from the Beenkar Gharana of Indore.
He has been a distinguished All India Radio Artiste since the early 1940s.
A few years before the Beatles met Ravi Shankar, in 1958, Khan collaborated with jazz pianist and composer Dave Brubeck.
He says of that meeting, We understood each other.
Khan also performed with the noted English classical guitarist Julian Bream in 1963.
Abdul Halim Jaffer Khan is perhaps best known for his innovation, Jafferkhani Baaj.
He describes it as, a synthesis of precision in technique, systematic thought with a vigorous playing style.
In the stillness of the night I heard the notes of Raga Chaayanat on the sitar emanate from my neighbors radio.
I immediately noticed that the tone of the sitar was completely different and the style of playing radically unique.
he was the first Hindustani musician to collaborate with Carnatic music in a performance with renowned Veena player Emani Sankara Sastry.
His early experimentation with polytonality in Indian classical instrumentation was achieved in his sitar quintet.
Khan has had a valuable involvement with Indian cinema.
In 1976, Abdul Halim Jaffer Khan created the Halim Academy of Sitar in Mumbai, India.
His legacy is being carried on by his son Zunain Khan, an accomplished sitarist himself.
Narrated by violinist Yehudi Menuhin, Deben Bhattacharyas film Raga features a young virtuosic Halim Jaffer Khan playing raga Sindh Bhairavi.
Kirana Gharana is one of the most prolific Hindustani khyal gharanas.
However, later he embraced Islam, and soon he mastered the khayal tradition.
One of its important exponent were Abdul Karim Khan and Abdul Wahid Khan and later Ameer Khan and Bhimsen Joshi.
A frequent visitor to the Court of Mysore, Ustad Abdul Karim Khan was also influenced by Carnatic music.
Particularly the culturally fecund border region between Karnataka and Maharashtra is famous for its tradition of the Kirana school of singing.
Another towering figure of this gharana in the early 20th century was Abdul Karim Khan 's cousin Abdul Wahid Khan.
Mind blowing, emotion drenched pukars in the higher octaves form a part of the musical experience.
The ragas mentioned above as Kirana favorites support this observation.
A Handful of Beauty.
A Handful of Beauty is a studio album released by the world fusion band Shakti in 1976.
Agra Gharana is a tradition of Hindustani classical vocal music descended from the Nauhar Bani.
So far, Nauhar Bani has been traced back to around 1300 AD, during the reign of Emperor Allauddin Khilji of Delhi.
The first known musician of this tradition is Nayak Gopal.
The style prevalent then in the Gharana was  Dhrupad-Dhamar.
Ustad Ghagghe Khudabuksh introduced the  Khayal  style of Gwalior Gharana into Agra gharana which Khudabaksh learnt from Natthan Paribaksh of Gwalior.
Furthermore the Khayal style of Atrauli Gharana was added in the late 19th century.
The gayaki of the Agra Gharana is a blend of khayal gayaki and Dhrupad - Dhamar.
In training, both the khayal and dhrupad components run hand in hand and are not taught in an isolated fashion.
Different facets of a raga are displayed with the help of bandish or cija while the raga is liberated using vistaar.
Bhaskar Raghunath Bakhale was a Hindustani classical vocalist, a composer, and a teacher.
Bhaskar Bakhale was born in an impoverished migrant Karhade Brahmin family in Kathor, a village in Gujarat, India.
His early training was in dhrupad and kirtan from Vishnubuwa Pingale in Vadodara.
The royal family of Vadodara arranged for musical lessons in the school run by its court musician Maula Baksha.
This apprenticeship continued in Mysore and Dharwad till the demise of Natthan Khan in year 1901.
In 1899, Natthan Khan recommended further training from Alladiya Khan, the founder of Jaipur-Atrauli gharana and a court musician of Kolhapur.
Starting year 1901, Bakhale learnt from Alladiya Khan, his brother Haider Khan, and his nephew Natthan Khan.
His apprenticeship with Alladiya Khan continued interrupted until Bakhales own death in 1922.
After completing his training in classical music, Bakhale returned as a classical vocalist in year 1899 or so.
During 1897-1901, he served as a professor of music at a training college in Dharwad.
Starting year 1901, he was based in Mumbai and Pune but performed throughout India and Nepal.
He was given the honorary title Deva Gandharva.
His notebook lists dhrupads and dhamars learnt by him but he rarely performed those in public.
He also had a successful career as the music director of Kirloskar Natak Mandali and, afterwards, of Gandharva Natak Mandali.
Govindrao Tembe benefited from Bakhales advisement in composing music for the stage play Sangeet Manapman.
These compositions continue to be performed on stage and in Hindustani classical recitals.
He also taught Ganesh Ramachandra Behare, a disciple of Abdul Karim Khan, for one year.
He also taught Vilayat Hussein Khan on a limited basis.
pt ram marathe is the famous disciple of bhaskarbua.
Bakhale was one of the first vocalists to receive traditional training from multiple gharana systems.
He toured and taught extensively in the states of Maharashtra, Gujarat, and Karnataka.
Unlike Paluskar and Bhatkhande, Bakhale introduced no radical reforms in the teaching methodology or in organizational aspects of this movement.
Bakhale was universally regarded an ideal and perfectly balanced vocalist but.
Bakhale has left no recorded legacy.
Gramophone Company had unsuccessfully arranged for two sets of his recordings in year 1911.
Shaila Datar, a musician married to his grandson Sudhir, has since completed this project and has released the book.
Bharat Gayan Samaj, set up by Bakhale in Pune, organizes musical recitals in his memory and observes his anniversaries.
Pracheen Kala Kendra in Chandigarh holds a conference titled All India Bhaskar Rao Nritya and Sangeet Sammelan annually.
Pune University annually confers a Pt.
Bhaskarbuwa Bakhale Award on the student standing first in its Bachelor of Arts program in the music discipline.
Early life and background.
Pandit Gajananrao Joshi also known, respectfully and affectionately, as Gajananbuwa Joshi came from a family of musicians.
Pandit Gajananbuwa Joshi was a highly skilled violin player by the age of 20.
His students include vocalist and violinist Madhukar Joshi, Vikas Kashalkar, Ulhas Kashalkar, Padma Talwalkar, and violinist Shridhar Parsekar.
He also taught vocalists Kaushalya Manjeshwar, Shubhada Paradkar, Veena Sahasrabuddhe and Jayashree Patnekar.
His daughter Malini, sons Manohar, Madhukar and Narayan are also trained musicians.
His sons variously took to singing, violin, and tabla.
Buwa worked as a Professor of Music at the Faculty of Music, University of Mumbai in 1970.
Awards & Honours.
Throughout his life, Gajananbuwa was invited to participate in almost all the major music conferences, festivals and events all over India.
In addition he was also invited to go to Nepal and Pakistan to take part in Music Programmes.
Buwa received the following prestigious awards for his contribution to Indian Classical music both as a violinist and a vocalist.
Sangeet Natak Akademi Award in 1972.
An award given in 1982 by the ITC Sangeet Research Academy, a Trust promoted by ITC Limited, Calcutta.
Tansen Samman given by the Government of Madhya Pradesh in 1985.
Gajananbuwas First Guru.
Pandit Anant Manohar Joshi.
Gajananbuwa 's first and principal Guru was his father Pandit Anant Manohar Joshi affectionately called Antubuwa.
His family and many of his disciples used to address him as ` Baba '.
Antubuwa was born in 1881 in a small village ` Kinhai ' near Aundh in Satara District in Maharashtra State.
Antubuwa 's father Pandit Manoharbuwa was also a singer gifted with a melodious and sweet voice.
Pandit Manoharbuwa unfortunately died when Antubuwa was only seven years of age.
Balkrishnabuwa himself was a highly accomplished and eminent musician of Gwalior Gharana Gayaki.
Needless to say that exposure to Ustad Rehamat Khan Saheb 's Gayaki enriched Antubuwa 's Gayaki.
In addition to teaching, Antubuwa also wrote and published books for learners of music.
His services were welcomed by the well cultured and supporter of arts the prince Balasaheb Pantapradhinidhi.
Young Gajanan was already showing signs of a sharp and intelligent learner of his father 's music.
In Mumbai Antubuwa 's school was open for nearly eight hours.
So young Gajanan was exposed to music for a long time on a daily basis.
However Gajananbuwa 's face to face training from Antubuwa started in Aundh.
The initial musical conditioning of Gajananbuwa took place under his father 's tutoring.
The seeds of pure Gwalior Gayaki were thus sown in the fertile mind of Gajananbuwa at a very tender age.
In fact his Violin playing mostly was based on Gwalior Gayaki.
Gajananbuwa had an opportunity to meet Ustad Faiyaz Khan Saheb in Mysore.
Khansaheb asked Buwa to sing for three consecutive days.
Buwa responded by singing for an hour or so on each day.
Giving a judgement on his sons progress in Music Antubuwa as a Guru of young Gajanan observed that.
He had an inherent talent for rhythm.
He also learnt ` Jaltarang ' Harmonium, and Sitar.
He thus learnt both Gwalior Gayaki and instrumental music at a young age.
Here are couple of anecdotes about Antubuwa that give some insight in the depth of Antubuwas thinking about Music.
One of Gajananbuwas disciples gave his maiden performance in the Shivanand Sangeet Mahotsava in Aundh.
Antubuwa asked the disciple what Raga he rendered.
The disciple named the Raga.
The young disciple was eager to learn Antubuwas response.
We leave the reader to work out the relevance of this story.
It is a palace with hundred doors !.
The vocalist who described it was another great musician of recent times - Pandit Kumar Gandharva.
Perhaps this is an example of how great minds think alike !.
Pandit Antubuwa passed away in 1967 in Gajananbuwa 's house in Dombivali.
For an in depth analysis of Antubuwas Music please refer to Dr Ashok Da Ranades book They lit the way.
Some anecdotes in Gajananbuwas life and career as a Musician :.
antubuvaanii buvaaNnaa ptraatuun lihile tujhii srv gaaykaaNnii hRdyaapaasuun taariiph kelii.
tii aikuun dhny jhaalo.
mii tulaa shikvle tyaace ciij jhaale !.
Paraphrased in English.
I got my reward of being your Guru !.
Gajananbuwa securely preserved his fathers letter.
This fascinating event is narrated by Shri Baburao Joshi of Kolhapur.
Baburao was the president of the famous Deval Music Club in Kolhapur when this event took place.
What follows is a brief paraphrased version in English of Baburao 's original piece in Marathi.
The princess of the Kolhapur State Taraabi Saheb was the chief guest.
Bal Gandharva was one of Buwa 's heroes.
Buwa started the recital with Raga Mulatani.
Buwa was in an excellent mood and spirit to pay his own respects to Bal Gandharva.
Buwa 's Mulatani on Violin and khansaheb 's accompaniment on Tabla overwhelmed the audience with joy !.
The excerpts from Baburao Joshis original piece in Marathi are given below :.
pnn buvaa aanni khaansaaheb yaaNcii jodd ` ii mnaatuun hllii naahii !.
A similar event took place later in Pune.
The location was the N M V High School.
On the grounds of the school a stage was built to celebrate Master Krishnaraos 60th Birthday.
Master Krishnaraos friends, fans, and disciples had organised a three day festival of music.
Musicians from different parts of India participated in the celebration.
Among them were Bade Gulam Ali Khan Saheb, Ustad Ajamat Hussain Khan Saheb, Gajananbuwa, and Ustad Thirakwa Khansaheb.
Gajanabuwa was an admirer of Master Krishnarao.
When Buwas turn came to play violin he started his recital with Raga Jogkans.
As usual Buwas extempore rhythmic work and Khansahebs equally ingenious accompaniment more than pleased the listeners.
Before Buwa started to play the second piece, Master Krishnarao who was sitting in the front made a request to Buwa.
Master Krishnarao asked Buwa to play Narwar Krishna Samman.
To witness this extraordinary concert was once in a lifetime opportunity !.
Buwas violin was singing the tender and loving poem about Rukimini falling in love with Krishna.
Master Krishnarao and other celebrity musicians were showering the spontaneous responses to Buwas performance !.
Here was the live music making at its best where the musicians and the listeners became one !.
The significance of these two events is not easy to appreciate for many of us.
He had almost ` lived ` this song !.
Here was Master Krishnaro a friend, a colleague and a Guru Bandhu of Bal Gandharva.
He had acted with Bal Gandharva and would have listened to Narawar Krishna Samaan thousand times.
Only Bal Gandharva and Master Krishnarao would know the answer to this question.
However let us venture to guess or speculate an answer :.
Music is an abstract art form.
Through Music a musician may be searching some kind of experience that transcends the material world, an experience that is spiritual.
That search may be for the ultimate beauty, ultimate truth, God or Brahman or whatever you may call it.
Geniuses like Bal Gandharva and Master Krishnarao perhaps did get that feel of spiritual experience in their own music making.
May be they re-experienced, relived that feel of the transcendental in Gajananbuwas music !.
We see here an interesting chain of connections.
Ustad Alladiya Khan Saheb - the Mount Everest of Hindustani Classical Music had applauded Bal Gandharvas Gayaki.
Bal Gandharva and Master Krishnarao applauded Gajananbuwas singing violin.
Buwa was a disciple of Alladiya Khansahebs disciple and son Ustad Bhurji Khansaheb.
Bal Gandharva and Master Krishnarao were disciples of Alladiya Khan Sahebs disciple Pandit Bhaskarbuwa Bakhale !.
That magic is as fresh today as it was then.
In 1950-51, an all-India music conference was organised in Bharatiya Vidyabhavan in Mumbai that was broadcast by All India radio.
Gajananbuwa was invited to play Violin and so was Ustad Thirkhwa Khasaheb to accompany Buwa.
Another well known Tabla player of Banaras Gharana the well known Pandit Samta Prasad was also an invitee to the conference.
He is such a well known musician.
Why only Thirkhawa Khansaheb should accompany Gajananbuwa ?.
After some discussion between Buwa, AIR management and Thirkhawa Khansaheb, Khansaheb suggested that both Samta Prasad and he shoud accompany Buwa.
In the end it was agreed that both the Tabla masters would individually accompany Buwa.
Rarely two great Tabla players were so eager to accompany a great instrumentalist !.
Here is a real treat for you.
Gajananbuwa plays Raga Mulatani and Khansaheb accompanies him on Tabla, a live performance.
Please visit Pandit Gajananbuwas Website for more information.
Pandit Gajananbuwa was one of the most versatile musicians of his time.
Indeed you could argue that he was a unique musician.
Here is a brief summary of the key facts of Gajananbuwa 's life.
Birth : 30 January 1911 in Mumbai.
Parents : Pandit Antubuwa and Indirabai.
Death : 28 June 1987 in Dombivali.
He was a child prodigy.
He started translating the musical configuration - Tanas - in the musical notation - Saragama - at a young age.
It is difficult enough to learn and grasp the Gayaki of one Gharana.
It takes many years may be a lifetime to master the Gayaki of a single Gharana.
Buwa however mastered the traditions of three musical schools in one lifetime.
He was probably the only Musician of an exceptionally high standard who was both a vocalist and an instrumentalist.
Indeed he is rightly credited to have introduced the use of violin to play the Indian Classical Music.
He was an undisputed grand master of Laya - Rhythm.
Mastering the Gayaki of a given Gharana naturally involved mastering new Ragas and new compositions.
What motivated him ?.
Thus he started his musical journey as a child learning from his father the great Pandit Antubuwa.
His further musical growth came about when he became a disciple of Pandit Vazebuwa.
It was Vazebuwa 's complex Gwailor Gayaki that attracted Gajananbuwa to Vazebuwa.
A remarkable and unique journey indeed !.
He almost invariably sang Khyal in his performances.
He presented a given Raga in a well defined framework of a given Gharana.
There would never be any mixture of Aalapi or Tana Patterns or phrases of the Gayaki of two or more Gharanas.
An extraordinary feat !.
One of the key lessons Buwa learnt from his Guru Vazebuwa was how to unravel or unfold a given Raga.
The so-called conceptual or intellectual Gayaki of Jaipur Gharana sounded less complex in Buwa 's presentation.
His tremendous and legendary hard work to Improve the quality of his voice is well documented.
One is reminded of a wonderful quote by Nietzsche the great German Philosopher :.
I know of no better life purpose than to perish in attempting the great and the impossible.
Far from perishing Gajananbuwa overwhelmingly succeeded in acquiring his weighty, tuneful and sonorous voice.
A broken earthen pot transformed into a golden jar !.
It seems that underlying Buwa 's musical journey there was a search for ORDER.
Music can be defined as ordered sound in time.
Some mathematicians define Mathematics as the science of order.
We may describe Music as an Art of order.
But the world of Hindustani Art Music is fortunate that he became a singer.
They Lit The Way.
Dr. Ashok Ranade a well known Musicologist and scholar was a disciple of Buwa.
The above book is published by Promilla & Co in association with Bibliophile South Asia.
To listen to Gajananbuwas vocal music please visit to the following link :.
Violin is capable of expressing precision, power, agility and a kind of mystical or spiritual beauty.
In other words violin is capable of extraordinary lyricism.
Violin is THE key string instrument in the Western Classical Music.
Symphony is considered the highest form of musical expression in the Western Classical Music.
Pandit Gajananbuwa 's greatest achievement was to introduce violin to the world of Hindustani Art Music.
Note however that Buwa went well beyond simply introducing Violin to Hindustani Art Music.
He was and remains probably the Greatest Violinist in the field of Hindustani Art Music.
Buwa 's father the great Antubuwa was a court singer in the small princely state of Aundh in Maharashtra.
The prince of Aundh was a culturally refined person.
He himself was a KIRTANKAR - kiirtnkaar.
Gajananbuwa had no formal training or guidance from any one whatsoever in the technique of using and playing the violin.
In short Buwa was a totally self trained violinist.
He naturally developed his technique to suit the musical material he wanted to present on the violin.
What was this material ?.
It was his rich repertoire of Raga Sangeet that consisted of Ragas, compositions and Gwalior Gharana Gayaki.
What other musical material Buwa presented on his violin ?.
Add to that his love and admiration for Bal Gandharva and Master Krishnarao.
His semi classical pieces on violin revealed his romantic, playful, lyrical and imaginative musical mind.
Buwa exploited his proficiency in playing violin with a vengeance !.
In almost every violin concert Buwa presented at least one Dhun or a Natya Song to the delight of his listeners.
But more importantly he fruitfully engaged in exploring the world of semi classical Hindustani Music.
In his vocal mode he sang only khyals of the three Gharanas.
In his violin playing he created his own compositions and rendered them in his Khyal Gayaki idiom.
And he displayed his creativity in the semi classical genres that allowed him a free play of his imagination.
He did succeed in fulfilling his ambition.
The expression singing violin can be truly and justifiably applied to Buwas violin.
To listen to Gajananbuwas music on violin visit the following link :.
Some of Buwas noted disciples.
Shreedhar Parsekar, Gajanan Karnad.
, Buwas sons Manohar Joshi and Madhukar Joshi.
Padmashree Ulhas Kashalkar, Dr. Arun Kashalkar, Dr. Vikas Kashalkar.
Jayashree Patnekar, Padma Talwalkar, Shubhada Paradkar, Kaushalya Manjeshwar.
Dr.Ashok Ranade, Veena Sahasrabuddhe, Shaila Datar, Kunda Weling,.
Buwa 's son Madhukar Joshi, Buwa 's daughter Sucheta Bidkar and Buwa 's granddaughters Pallavi Joshi and Apoorva Gokhale.
Here is a web link for Gajananbuwas one to one tuitions he gave to his disciples.
Gajananbuwa Joshi as seen by others :.
Whenever Buwa sings a Jaipur Gharana composition he presents his structured rhythmic work more beautifully than the vocalists of Jaipur Gharana.
That surely has to be acclaimed as Buwas triumph !.
K D Dikshit was a senior executive at All India Radio, a writer, music critic and above all a music connoisseur.
aaj yaa jnmdaatyaa gvaalher ghraannyaacii thoddiiphaar vaataahaat jhaalelii diste, triisuddhaa pNddit gjnaanaabuvaa joshii yaanii gvaalher gaaykiicii dhvjaa uNc phddkaavt tthevlii aahe.
Paraphrased in English :.
Mr Vamanrao Deshpande - Musicologist, singer and critic :.
Professor G H Ranade in the Sangeet Natak Academy Journal Number 4 writes :.
Gajananbuwa is ranked today, as a master of musicians.
Antubuwas greatest contribution to music is thus personalised in his son Gajananbuwa.
What a wonderful compliment !.
From the Newspaper LINK dated November 8, 1959 :.
The best combination heard in the Sammelan was violin by Gajananrao Joshi of Bombay and tabla by Karamatullah Khan of Calcutta.
Both played with inspiration and verve and opened up new vistas of aesthetic enjoyment.
Joshis Raga Khamaj was intensely lyrical and was enlivened by occasional counterpoints.
His dancing reproduced by Karamatullah on tabla, to which the latter added his own inimitable fluttering notes.
Katamatullah could have stood on his own without occasional histrionics which detracted from the dignity of the occasion.
Listeners and fans of Buwa.
This is a rare gem.
Not many violin players have played GAVATI in this style.
Variety shown is indeed awesome.Those who have heard him live will bless you for ever.
There is no doubt that Pandit Gajananbuwa Joshi is legendary and will continue to delight his fans all over the world.
I have bookmarked the AudioFarm Pandit Gajananbuwa Joshi page and will listen to it in my spare free time.
Gajananbuwas vocal rendering of Bhimpalas is superb.
What is interesting about Buwas performance is that he starts with Nom Tom.
I recently listened to Faiyaz Khansahebs DES.
I just love Nom Tom of Khansaheb, Dhrupad vocalists, Gajananbuwa and Ratnjankarbuwas few pieces among other musicians of Agra Gharana.
Hence their surrender to the SWARAS through the Nom Tom !!.
May be Gajananbuwa was attracted to Agra Gharana for its singing of Nom Tom.
This is precisely what Buwa does in his performance of Bhimpalas.
What a delightful performance !.
The piece is called Well-Tempered Claviers.
Bachs Well Tempered Clavier.
The legendary Bal Gandharva once said to Antubuwa the father of Gajananbuwa :.
Antubuwa, it is no surprise that your son Gajananbuwa sings Gwailor Gayaki so well.
After all he was brought up at home with your Gwailor Gayaki.
But Gajananbuwa presents the Jaipur Gharana Gayaki also with such mastery and confidence.
This appreciation coming from Bal Gandharva speaks volumes about Gajananbuwas Jaipur Gayaki !.
Pandit Rane was a desciple of Pandit Firoz Dastur of Kirana Gharana.
The recording of Buwas presentation of Dehata Sharanagata almost brought tears to my eyes.
Only Chhota Gandharva could sing such varieties.
Again I was fortunate to accompany him at Balmohan School, Dadar when I was learning Classical Music.
The Great Thirakhaw Khansahebs comment about Buwa.
The emperor of Tabla the Great Ustad Thirakhawa Khan Saheb said about Pandit Gajananbuwa :.
To date I have not seen such a fearless artist among Brahmins.
Ruhaniyat - The All India Sufi & Mystic Music Festival.
Ruhaniyat - The All India Sufi & Mystic Music Festival is a music festival held in across India.
It is organised by Mumbai - based cultural organisation Banyan Tree Events between November and March every year.
Musicians from various parts of India -- sufi qawwals, mystic musicians, Kabir panthis, and Bauls -- perform at the festival.
Ruhaniyat means Soulfulness.
Since the death of his father and later, his uncle, Wasifuddin has been singing solo.
He was awarded the Padma Shri in 2010.
Life and training.
Between 1989 and 1994, he was groomed by his uncle, Ustad Zahiruddin Dagar, with whom he used to sing jugalbandis.
A detailed biography of Ustad Wasifuddin Dagar is available on his website http://www.dagarvani.org.
He sang with Ustad Zahiruddin Dagar.
Wasifuddins first major recording were in Switzerland, India and Japan, in 1992.
He has since recorded in Switzerland, India, and America with major recording labels.
A French television company made a film based on their life and music.
Wasifuddin Dagar has toured North America performing dhrupad solo since 2000.
He first performed live in New York in 2000, where he gave a rendition of Raga Bihag.
The 2008 spring tour of his ensemble to North America is scheduled for April-June 2008.
for A complete list of his recordings is at his websites recording page.
She was a music producer at All India Radio and later with Doordarshan.
In 1974, she was awarded the Padma Shri, the fourth highest civilian honour given by Government of India.
Early life and training.
Thereafter, she went to listen to Agurbala at her home in Masjid Bari Street.
In 1934, at the age of 16, she married Ripjit Singh, third son of Raja Charanjit Singh of princely Kapurthala State.
After her marriage she moved to Kapurthala in Punjab and wasnt allowed to sing.
Though her husband died in 1949, when she was 32 years of age.
After the death of husband in 1949, she moved to Delhi, where she spent the rest of her life.
Though she also sang in other genres like qawwali and ghazal.
She also taught notable disciples like Shubha Mudgal and Vidya Rao.
In 2011, one of her disciples, Vidya Rao wrote a memoir about her titled, Heart to Heart : Remembering Naina Devi.
Her elder sister, Sadhana Bose was a noted dancer and film actress of 1930s and 40s.
Her other sister Rani Binita Roy was married into the royal family of Chakma.
It originated in Bishnupur, West Bengal, India in late 18th-century.
The name of the town means city of Vishnu in Bengali.
Bishnupur Gharana was established in 1370 A. D. by the court musicians of Malla Kings.
Historians suggest that ` Mallabhum ' had once been the cultural centre of Eastern India.
It also has the distinction of being the only Gharana in West Bengal.
The king, Raghunath Singh Deo II, made all arrangements to honour him as his court singer.
He also bore the financial liability for the poor students.
In time, a good number of students became the disciples of Bahadur Khan.
Historical evidence points to Pt.
Ramachandra Bhattacharya, a desciple of Ud.
Bahadur Khan as the founder of the gharana.
Bishnupur Gharana therefore has a strong link to Betia Gharana through this unbroken relationship.
Three of them were from Bishnupur Gharana : Gopeswar Bandyopadhyay, Satyakinkar Bandyopadhyay and Khetra Mohan Goswami.
First Dhrupad record In 1902 Naad Bidya Sabse Sera Raag Darbari, Taal Choutal, by Surendranath Bandyopadhyay published by Gramophone Concert.
Khayal started from Ramshankar Bhattachariya 's age.
His writings on Khayal is being found Bramhamoyi Paratpara, on the Raga Yaman Kalyan.
Ramprasanna Bandyopadhyay was the foremost Surbahar and Sitar Artist of India up to 1928.
They gave a trio performance in Dhrupad.
After this they gave individual performance.
Satyakinkar Bandyopadhyay also played Sitar in that conference and stood first along with Enayat khan.
Style of singing.
In this style, the artist excels in unfolding the beauty of the Raga through the alap.
It is simple, devoid of heavy, cumbersome ornamentation.
It is free from intricate play with the rhythm.
Layakari is however allowed in Dhamar, another form of vocalization.
The Khayal of the Bishnupur School is noted for its sweet, lilting melody.
It is adorned with the usual ornaments, which add variety to the melodic presentation of the Raga.
It has also developed its own character with regard to rhythm.
It was this gharana which invented the tradition of Sawal-Jabab in Hindustani Music.n.
Its origins and the development have led to a great openness in the teaching and evolution within this gharana.
Most of the exponents of Bishnupur learnt Dhrupad vocal and instrumental music simultaneously.
In spite of producing such a talented group of musicians, Bishnupur lacked venues for performances.
Rag Lalit is a studio album by Indian classical musician Ram Narayan, released in 1989.
The album consists of a single track performance of the raga Lalit.
Lalit is commonly described as calm and devotional and is performed at dawn.
Recording and artwork.
When Talwalkar plays a solo, the sarangi repeats the melody.
The performance was mastered in England, but not edited.
In the same session that produced Rag Lalit, the 1987 album Rag Bhupal Tori, Rag Patdip was recorded.
The album cover features a 19th-century painting of the goddess Tripura Sundari, also called Lalita.
Govind Sadashiv Tembe, popularly known as Govindrao Tembe was a harmonium player, stage actor, and music composer.
Narayan Sitaram Phadke had called Govindrao Tembe the architect of Marathi Natya Sangeet.
Bal Gandharva considered Tembe his guru.
He grew up in Kolhapur and became attached to music early in life.
He was largely self-taught as harmonium player.
He has acknowledged the debt of Deval Club for his initial forays into Hindustani classical music.
He composed music for the drama Manapman in 1910, and also for the first Marathi talkie Ayodhyecha Raja.
He also acted in both these productions.
His musical score of Manapman remains popular till the date.
He was a personal friend of Late Yuvaraja of Mysore, HH Sri.
Kanteerva Narasimha Raja Wadiyar.
Prof. Tembe was part of a large entourage of Yuvaraja during his trip to Europe in 1939.
The Troupe performed before Pope and at other places during this trip.
He was part-owner of Gandharva Natak Mandali when it was formed in 1913.
Two years later, he started his own company named Shivraj Natak Mandali.
He wrote dramas and also the padas in them.
Tembes total published work runs into more than two and half thousand pages.
Akhil Bharatiya Gandharva Mahavidyalaya is an institution established in 1939 to popularize Indian classical music and dance.
The first Gandharva Mahavidyalaya was established by him on 5 May 1901 at Lahore.
The institution was relocated to Mumbai after 1947 and has subsequently established its administrative office at Miraj, Sangli District, Maharashtra.
The institution imparts theoretical and practical training in the following branches of music and dance -.
Hindustani Music : Vocal.
Hindustani Music Instrumental : Sitar, Bansuri, Tabla, Harmonium and Violin.
Indian Classical Dance : Kathak, Bharatanatyam and Odissi.
The courses of study followed by the Mahavidyalaya are those approved by the Akhil Bharatiya Gandharva Mahavidyalaya Mandal.
It has nearly 1200 affiliated institutions and 800 Exam Centers across India.
In 2007, the number of students enrolled exceeded 100,000, for the.
Gandharva Mahavidyalaya, New Delhi was established in 1939 by Padma Shri Pt.
Vinaychandra Maudgalaya from the Gwalior gharana and his younger brother Pt.
They were assisted by their younger brother Sh.
Pramod Mudgal who is member of the Akhil Bhartiya Gandharva mahavidyalaya advisory board.
This was headed by Pt.
Vipin Chandra Maudgalya, and was functioning as Delhi branch of Gandharva Mahavidyalaya till 2003.
In 1972 The new building in Deen dayal Upadhyaya Marg was estabalished and it now headed by Pt.
Vinay Chandra Maudgalayas son Pt.
Madhup Mudgal since 1995.
It has over 1,200 students and a faculty of 60 teachers.
Anupam Mudgal and smt.
Gandharva Mahavidyalaya has also been organizing the annual Vishnu Digamber Festival in Delhi, for many years now.
There is no branch of Gandharva Mahavidyalaya, New Delhi elsewhere in Delhi.
It is affiliated to Akhil Bhartiya Gandharva Mahavidyalaya, Miraj.
The Mahavidyalaya is guided by a Music Advisory Board composed of top ranking learned and veteran musicians of India.
The following Certificates / Diplomas of ABGMM are awarded to the successful students -.
Sangeet Praveshika i.e., equivalent to matriculation.
i.e., equivalent to senior secondary.
Sangeet Visharad i.e., equivalent to Bachelor of Music - Graduate Standard.
Sangeet Alankar i.e., equivalent to Masters of Music - Post-Graduate Standard.
Admission to Gandharva Mahavidyalaya is open to persons of all ages, castes, creeds and religions.
Male and female students are trained separately.
There is one session in a year - in July.
Applicants are required to undergo a Music Syllabuspreliminary test.
Only those who clear this test are granted admission.
Sangeet Mahavidyalaya, Collectorate Cultural Club, Near Pvt. Bus Stand, Po-Keonjhargahr, Dist-Keonjhar - 758001, Orissa.
Courses : From Praramvit to Alankar,.
Classes : Saturday and Sunday.
Affiliated under Akhila Bharatiya Gandahrva Mahavidyalaya Mandal, Miroj Mumbai.
Official Music Syllabus is available at Gandharva Mandal Website Information Page.
Prarambhik : Pre-matric.
Knowledge of Shudha Swaras, Vadi, Samvadi, Audav-Shadav and one Chhota Khayal in each raga of the first year course.
Praveshika : Knowledge of Shudha and Vikrit Swaras, Alankar, Nad Saptak, Mela, Raga, Jati, Alap, Tan and Pakar.
Ragas : asavari, bibhas, Vridavani sarang, Bhimpalas, Durga, Des.
Praveshika : Matric Music Knowledge of Alankars of more than four swaras including Vikrit Swara.
Additional Ragas : Alhaiya Bilawal, Kedar, Bihag, Bhairav, Malkauns, Bageshri.
Tala : Ektal Vilambit, Chautal, Dhamar, Rupak, Dugun of all Tals.
Knowledge of systems of Hindustani and Carnatic music ; specialities of Nad, Varna, Swaralipi of Vishnu Digambar and Bhatkhande paddhati.
Biography of Pt.
Vishnu Digambar Paluskar.
Madhyama : Tuning of Tanpura, Division of 22 Shruts in seven swaras.
Tala : Jhumra, Sul, Tilwada and Deepchandi ; detailed knowledge of Laya ; practical knowledge of Meend, Sut, Ghasit, Murki.
Madhya Laya Khayals with improvisations.
Chautal, Adha, Punjabi Dhumali, Chacher and Sul.
Dhrupad-Dhamar in Dugun, Tigun, Chaugun and Chhagun.
Chhagun and Athgun Tana with Jod, Alap Jhala, Maseetkhani knowGat.
Styles of Alap ; detailed description of varieties of Tanas ; Vidari, Ragalakashan, Jatigayan, Vinyas, Apanyas, Gayaki, Nayaki, Ladant.
Writing in Swaralipi ; Classification of Ragas ; Biographies of ancient musicians.
Visharad : B. Music.
Knowledge of Gram, Moorchhana, Kalawant, Pandit, Vaggeyakar, Khandarbani Nauharbani, etc.
Varieties of Gamak, Rag-ragini paddhati, That paddhati and Raga paddhati.
Knowledge of Staff Notation ; history of the instrument, importance of Jhankar in instrument ;.
necessity of Tarab ; application of Chikari.
visharad tritiya - ragas are lalit, bilaskhani todi, jaunpuri, marubihag, Nand, Miyanmalhar, Hansdhwahni, Darabari, Basant, Tilakkamod.
Sangeet Alankar : M. Music.
Any one of the following three to be taken :.
Performance and Music Composition.
Science and History of Music.
Shobha Gurtu was an Indian singer in the light Hindustani classical style.
Early life and background.
She was particularly influenced by singer Begum Akhtar and Ustad Bade Ghulam Ali Khan.
She also performed music in Marathi and Hindi cinema.
In Marathi cinema she sang for films like Saamna and Lal Mati.
Her album of gazal Tarz along with Mehdi Hassan was popular.
She often lend her voice the collaborative jazz albums, of her son Trilok Gurtu.
In 2002, she was awarded the Padma Bhushan.
She married Vishwanath Gurtu, and took the name Shobha Gurtu.
Her son Trilok Gurtu is a famed percussionist.
Her other son is Narendra.
Tina Sugandh is an Indian born writer, singer, tabla player, dancer, guitarist, and actress.
She is also a principal cast member on season 1 of the Bravo reality television show,.
Sugandh and her sister, Seema, traveled with their parents to all of their performances.
At the age of five Tina sang on stage for the first time.
She sang a ghazal, and she and her parents recognized that she loved performing ; they encouraged her to continue.
At 15, Sugandh was discovered by Sean Harris, a screenwriter and creative mentor.
Sullivan was impressed and had her perform for Jay Jay French, his partner in the new venture.
French was equally impressed and the duo signed her to their new company, Rebellion Entertainment.
They spent the next year developing her songs and creating new demos.
These demos lead to a publishing deal with Warner/Chappell Music and a Sony deal.
Her original album was intended to be released by Hollywood Records.
Her family made appearances throughout the album.
However, the album was never released.
Sugandh has written and recorded over 60 songs.
In 2008, her remix of Break Me reached # 4 on the Billboard Dance Chart.
Break Me was also on the premiere episode of the new Melrose Place series.
In 2009, Sugandh collaborated with Ringo Starr on his album Why Not.
In 2010, Sugandh released a single under the Timbaland umbrella entitled So Good, which features Fat Joe.
Her first album, TablaGirl, came out on May 12, 2009 was released independently.
The following tracks are available on the album :.
Amit Arya was born in Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
He began learning music at the age of six.
In June 1999, Amit started learning under Padma Vibhushan Pandit Jasraj and has continued learning primarily from his senior disciples.
They are :.
Amit Arya holds a medical Degree from the University of British Columbia and is a Medical Doctor by profession.
Amit is unique as in he is the first Canadian born Indian Classical Vocalist performing and teaching at his level.
Amit specializes in Hindustani Classical Music.
He also presents other forms of devotional music such as bhajans.
Narayanrao Vyas was a Hindustani Musician of Gwalior gharana.
He was a disciple of Vishnu Digambar Paluskar.
He cut several 78 rpm discs, classical khayals and semi-classical bhajans and thumris, at around 1930 which became very famous.
His father and uncle were well-known musicians in Kolhapur.
Narayanraos elder brother, Shankarrao Vyas, was also a singer and composer of distinction.
Pandit Mani Prasad is an Indian vocalist in the Hindustani classical tradition.
Mani Prasad was born into a family of very respected musicians.
Pandit Sukhdev Prasad Ji was one of the most respected and renowned Indian Classical singers of his time.
His most famous student is Pt.
Dinanath Mangeshkar, the father of the world famous Indian playback singers Lata Mangeshkar and Asha Bhosle.
He moved from Wardha in Maharashtra to New Delhi, in his youth along with his father.
Mani Prasad started his career early, being brought up in a musical family.
He is ranked as a Top Grade A class artist by the All India Radio.
He is a well recognised television artist with the Doordarshan.
He has performed extensively all across the world and has received much appreciation and respect everywhere.
Ramesh Jule, Ravi Jule, Pt.
Haricharan Verma, Smt.
Surinder Kaur, Shri Kailash Verma, Smt.
Sudarshan Dewan, Pt.
Vishwanath, Chandan Dass, Smt.
Nirmala Gopalakrishnan, Uma Garg, Seema Anil Sehgal, Smt.
Saraswati Bai, Sant Satnam Singh among many others.
He also took up the position of the Guru at the Smt.
Gangubai Hangal Gurukul in Hubli, Karnataka where he was invited by the Government of Karnataka.
Panditji has been widely recorded both in Audio tapes and CDs and videos.
He is extensively recorded in the AIR Archives and Doordarshan.
Other than these, his cassettes and CDs released are :.
His video recordings on the internet are also very popular and widely viewed all across the globe.
Honours and Awards.
Panditji is the recipient of many Awards, Honors and Felicitations.
These include :.
Panditji now lives in New Delhi.
Brij Narayan is an Indian classical musician who plays the string instrument sarod.
He won the All India Radio instrumentalist competition in 1967 and accompanied his father on a tour to Afghanistan in 1969.
Narayan graduated from the University of Mumbai in 1972 and has since worked on movies and toured Africa, Europe, and America.
Narayan was born on 25 April 1952 in Udaipur, Rajasthan as the oldest son of sarangi player Ram Narayan.
He was taught music from an early age and began playing the sarod at the age of seven.
In 1967, Narayan received the Presidents gold medal as top instrumentalist in the All India Radio competition.
He received the Dagar Gharana Award from the Mewar Foundation in 1996 and toured France again in 1999.
Family and personal life.
Narayan is married, lives in Mumbai, and has children.
Narayan works for the Pt Ram Narayan Foundation in Mumbai, which offers scholarships to sarangi students.
Bhimsen Gururaj Joshi ; February 4, 1922 - January 24, 2011  He was an Indian vocalist in the Hindustani classical tradition.
He was born in Gadag, Karnataka to a Kannada Madhwa family.
He is known for the khayal form of singing, as well as for his popular renditions of devotional music.
Subsequently received the Bharat Ratna, Indias highest civilian honour, in 2008.
His first music teacher was Channappa Kurtakoti, who had trained with the veteran singer Inayat Khan.
Pandit Shyamacharya taught him to sing as well as play the harmonium.
Search for a guru.
During this time, he also heard Pandit Sawai Gandharva at a performance in Kundgol.
In 1933, the 11-year-old Joshi left Dharwad for Bijapur to find a master and learn music.
With the help of money lent by his co-passengers in the train Bhimsen reached Dharwad first and later went to Pune.
Eventually, his father succeeded in tracking him down in Jalandar and brought young Bhimsen back home.
In 1936, Sawai Gandharva, a native of Dharwad, agreed to be his guru.
Joshi stayed at his house in the guru-shishya tradition.
Joshi continued his training with Sawai Gandharva till 1940.
Joshi first performed live in 1941 at the age 19.
His debut album, containing a few devotional songs in Marathi and Hindi, was released by HMV the next year in 1942.
Later Joshi moved to Mumbai in 1943 and worked as a radio artist.
Hindustani classical music.
Joshi occasionally employed the use of sargam and tihaais, and often sang traditional compositions of the Kirana gharana.
His music often injected surprising and sudden turns of phrase, for example through the unexpected use of boltaans.
Some of Joshis more popular ragas include Shuddha Kalyan, Miyan Ki Todi, Puriya Dhanashri, Multani, Bhimpalasi, Darbari, and Ramkali.
Joshis singing has been influenced by many musicians, including Smt.
Kesarbai Kerkar, Begum Akhtar and Ustad Amir Khan.
Joshi assimilated into his own singing various elements that he liked in different musical styles and Gharanas.
In devotional music, Joshi was most acclaimed for his Hindi, Kannada and Marathi Bhajan singing.
He has recorded bhakti songs in Marathi, Santavani and Kannada, Dasavani.
The video was created for the purpose of national integration in India, and highlights the diversity of Indian culture.
Joshi sang for several films, including Basant Bahar with Manna Dey, Birbal My Brother with Pandit Jasraj.
He also sang for the films Tansen and Ankahee where latter fetched him National Film Award for Best Male Playback Singer.
He also sang as a playback singer for the Marathi film Gulacha Ganapati, produced and directed by P. L. Deshpande.
Sawai Gandharva Music Festival.
Joshi conducted the festival annually since 1953, until his retirement in 2002.
His greatest endeavour in perpetuating his legacy could be the Sawai Gandharva Festival held at Pune.
annually since the year 1953 which seeks to promote a certain music culture.
Madhava Gudi, Narayan Deshpande, Shrikant Deshpande and Upendra Bhat are some of his more well-known disciples.
Joshi was twice-married.
His first wife was Sunanda Hunagund, daughter of his maternal uncle, whom he married in 1944.
He had four children from Sunanda ; Raghavendra, Usha, Sumangala, and Anand.
He married Vatsala Mudholkar his co-actor in the Kannada play Bhagya-Shree in 1951.
Although bigamous marriages among Hindus were prohibited by law in the Bombay Presidency, he did not divorce or separate from Sunanda.
With Vatsala, he had three children ; Jayant, Shubhada, and Shrinivas.
Joshi had a passion for cars.
He was a swimmer, an enthusiast of yoga and a football player.
He had acknowledged his weakness for alcohol but became a teetotaller after it started affecting his career.
Illness and death.
Joshi was admitted to Sahyadri Super Speciality Hospital on December 31, 2010 with gastrointestinal bleeding and bilateral pneumonia.
Due to difficulty in breathing, he was put on ventilator support.
He suffered convulsions and was put on dialysis too during his stay in hospital.
Though he recovered briefly for three days when he was taken off the ventilator, his condition deteriorated thereafter.
He died on 24 January 2011.
He was cremated at Vaikunth Crematorium in Pune with full state honors.
Gurtu was born to Hindu Brahmin parents in Mumbai, and attended Don Bosco High School in Mumbai.
His mother, singer Shobha Gurtu, encouraged him to learn playing tabla, and he studied playing the instrument under Shah Abdul Karim.
Gurtu began playing western drum kit in the 1970s, and developed interest in jazz.
In the 1970s, he played with Charlie Mariano, John Tchicai, Terje Rypdal, and Don Cherry.
His mother also sang in that record, and later joined him in his first solo CD, Usfret.
The line-up with Hellborg performed at least one concert opening for Miles Davis in Berkeley, California in 1988.
Gurtus unique percussion signature involves dipping cymbals and strings of shells into a bucket of water to create a shimmering effect.
Gurtu joined Oregon after the death of drummer Collin Walcott.
He played in three records produced by this band : Ecotopia, 45th Parallel, and Always, Never and Forever.
In the early 1990s Gurtu resumed his career as a solo artist and a bandleader.
Various noted musicians have backed him in a number of his CD releases.
Gurtu joined this group along with Karsh Kale and Talvin Singh.
The group released three albums before going dormant in late 2003.
In 2004, Gurtu created an album, Miles Gurtu, with Robert Miles.
His collaboration with the Arke String Quartet began in 2007 with the release of the album Arkeology.
Gurtu has garnered a number of prestigious awards and nominations, including :.
With Jan Garbarek.
With Jonas Hellborg.
Thakur Jaidev Singh.
Thakur was also influenced by the Indian musicologist Vishnu Narayan Bhatkhande.
Ramesh Mishra is an Indian sarangi player.
Mishra comes from a family of sarangi players and studied from an early age from a number of his older relatives.
He is a disciple of Ravi Shankar and has made numerous recordings.
In addition to his performances of Indian classical music, he has recorded with the American rock band Aerosmith.
Mishra was awarded a Sangeet Natak Akademi Award in 2008.
Sthayi or Asthaayi is an initial phrase or line of a fixed, melodic composition in Hindustani music.
Its a way of systematizing the parts of a composition.
Ustad Shamsuddin Bhurji Khan was a Hindustani Classical vocalist of the Jaipur-Atrauli Gharana founded by his father, Utd.
Bhurji Khan was the third and youngest son of Utd.
Despite this, Utd.
Alladiya Khan felt that Utd.
Bhurji Khan was the most capable of his children.
In his late youth, Utd.
Bhurji Khan fell seriously ill with motzira while visiting Uniara.
Musical style and training.
Bhurji Khans illness affected his musical growth.
Brain damage from the illness contributed to his forgetfulness and memory loss.
As a result, his father abandoned training him, where he continued his musical training with his uncle, Utd.
Haider Khans persistence, it was only until Utd.
Bhurji Khan took to teaching that his memory solidified and his musical growth resumed.
After this, his training with his father resumed.
Bhurji Khan was instrumental in expanding the presence of the Jaipur-Atrauli gayaki in Hindustani Classical music.
Among his many disciples are Pt.
Mohanrao Palekar, Smt.
Kishori Amonkar, Pt.
Madhusudhan Kanetkar, Madhukar Sadolikar, brother of Pt.
Wamanrao Sadolikar, Pt.
Nivruttibuwa Sarnaik, and his own son, Baba Azizuddin Khan.
Bhurji Khans foremost disciple was Pt.
After the death of his elder brother, Utd.
Manji Khan, Utd.
Bhurji Khan agreed to teach Pt.
Mallikarjun Mansur under his fathers command.
Bhurji Khan died in 1950 after a prolonged illness.
Like his famous father, Utd.
Bhurji Khan did not leave behind any recordings.
Dr. Ashwini Bhide-Deshpande is a Hindustani classical music vocalist of the Jaipur-Atrauli Gharana.
Early life and training.
She then completed her Sangeet Visharad from the Gandharva Mahavidyalaya.
Since then, Dr. Bhide-Deshpande has been under the tutelage of her mother Smt.
Manik Bhide, who has been instilling in her the intricacies and traditions of the Jaipur-Atrauli Gharana.
Dr. Bhide-Deshpande also received guidance from one of the stalwarts of the Jaipur-Atrauli Gharana, Pt.
Ratnakar Pai until his death in 2009.
Dr. Bhide-Deshpande holds a Masters degree in Microbiology and earned a doctorate in Biochemistry from the University of Bombay.
It was not until she completed her doctorate, when Dr. Bhide-Deshpande even considered a professional career in music.
Despite, Dr. Bhide-Deshpande was well received by musical connoisseurs since her late teens.
She holds a strong command over the three primary saptaks.
A sequel titled Ragarachananjali 2, containing 98 more bandishes was published in 2010.
Rajkumar Shyamanand Sinha.
Rajkumar Shyamanand Sinha was the eldest son of Raja Bahadur Kirtyanand Sinha of the Banaili estate.
The turnaround happened when in 1935, he happened to come across a 78 RPM record of Ustad Vishmadev Chattopadyay.
The record had Rut Basant in Raga Rageshri Bahar and Piya Pardes in Patdeep, famous renditions by the Ustad.
This moved him so much that he was now determined to learn music from him.
When Ustad Vishmadev Chattopadyay visited his home for a performance in Champanagar, he created an even deeper impression on him.
Shyamanand Sinha learnt from Ustad Vishmadev Chattopadyay from 1936 to 1939.
As a Classical Vocalist.
Though not a professional vocalist, Shyamanand Sinhas singing was a literal feast for the listeners.
He belonged to the old school of Hindustani classical music and believed in maintaining purity and spontaneity in performance.
His choice of bandishes for performances were carefully selected for their sahityic value.
He laid particular emphasis on the mood of words and with extraordinary felicity married them to the mood of the ragas.
For this reason, he stood apart from the current day performers as well as many of his contemporaries.
A taan was to be used to beautify the rendition, where apt, and in the raganga, not just for its sake.
At another place, he mentions jo bhi gao sur me gao.
Shyamanand Sinha believed that singing was the highest form of devotion and this reflected in his performances.
The Agra influence on his singing was most unmistakable.
But, as indciated above, he learnt from many others and developed his own unique style of singing.
After listening to Bandishes from Kumar Saheb, Jasraj was moved to tears and lamented that alas !.
he could have such ability himself.
This included some great contemporary singers like Kesarbai Kerkar.
She even expressed her readiness to make him her Guru for this song.
Kesarbai sang this composition on a few occasions later and never forgot to acknowledge her Guru for the song.
Not a professional musician, he sang for his own pleasure and which reflected in his singing.
This made it difficult to plan a concert around him.
However, many of his admirers still managed to get him out for public performances in many places.
However, in general, he shunned music as a profession and never sought public recognition.
As a patron of Classical Music.
Shyamanand Sinha was also a great patron of classical music.
Kumar Saheb was so enthused by the expert rendition of Raag Malkaus thst he would not allow them to leave Champanagar.
The boys and their father stayed as guests of the Rajkumar for nearly two months.
Pandit Channulal Mishra first performance as a young artiste was at Champanagar for Kumar Saheb.
After listening to him, Kumar Saheb wanted to keep the boy at Champanagar as his court musician.
Unfortunately, the few professional recordings done by All India Radio in the latter part of his life are untraceable.
Only a few amateur recordings of his singing are available with his family members and friends.
These are rare treasures and absolute delight for the senses.
Every year on his birth anniversary a classical musical programme is organised in Purnea in his memory.
Reference to Ustad Vishmadev Chattopadyay as a Guru of Rajkumar Shyamanand Sinha.
Banaili - Roots to Raj by Kumar Girijanand Sinha ; a quick reference to extracts are available here.
Swar Gandh written by Padmashri Gajendra Narayan Singh, former Bihar Sangeet Natak Academy Chairman and musicologist.
Surile Logon Ki Sangat by Padmashri Gajendra Narayan Singh, former Bihar Sangeet Natak Academy Chairman and musicologist.
Ustad Nasir Aminuddin Dagar was an Indian dhrupad singer in the dagar-vani style.
He is also remembered as the younger brother in the legendary jugalbandi or duo of Senior Dagar Brothers.
Subsequently after Ustad Nasiruddin Khans demise the two brothers trained under Ustad Riyazuddin Khan and Ustad Ziauddin Khan Dagar.
Senior Dagar Brothers.
Young Aminuddin gave his first performance at the age of eleven.
Moinuddin and Aminuddin on the other hand brought back the concept of a harmonious synchronization between the two singers.
After having established Dhrupad in a pedestal of glory in India, they were invited to perform abroad.
The two brothers visited Russia and Japan mezmerising the audience of both East and West with their divine music.
Ustad Nasir Moinuddin Dagar died soon after this concert in 1966.
Dhrupad Sangeet Ashram.
In 1975 he founded his own Dhrupad institute and named after his elder brother Ustad Nasir Moinuddin Dagar Dhrupad Sangeet Ashram.
It is now the oldest surviving institute solely dedicated to the preservation and propagation of dagar-vani Dhrupad.
Ustad Nasir Aminuddin dagar had been honoured with numerous awards and accolades.
Below is a list of some important awards that he received :.
D. V. Paluskar.
Pandit Dattatreya Vishnu Paluskar, was a Hindustani classical vocalist.
He was considered a child prodigy.
Early life and background.
D.V. Paluskar was born in Nasik, Maharashtra to well-known Hindustani musician Vishnu Digambar Paluskar.
He was also trained by Pandit Chintamanrao Paluskar and Pandit Mirashi Buwa.
D.V. Paluskar gave his debut performance at the Harvallabh Sangeet Sammelan in Punjab at the age of fourteen.
He had a very sweet and melodious voice.
He was a master at presenting an attractive and comprehensive picture of a raga in a very short duration.
Besides pure classical music, he was also a great bhajan singer.
He cut his first disc in 1944 and visited China as a member of the Indian cultural delegation in 1955.
He is also famous for an unforgettable duet with Amir Khan in the film Baiju Bawra.
The only other film he sang for was a Bengali film called Shaap Mochan.
He died from encephalitis on 26 October 1955.
Ghulam Hassan Shaggan.
Ghulam Hassan Shaggan is a Pakistani classical singer of the Gwalior Gharana.
His father 's name was Bhai Lal Mohammad, who belonged to the Gwalior - Kapurthala Gharana.
Ghulam Hassan Shaggan, along with his father and family, moved to Pakistan in 1947 and settled in Lahore.
His father Bhai Lal was appointed music supervisor at Radio Pakistan where the son started performing.
He received countless awards and titles during his 1962 tour of India.
On the same tour, he was presented with a certificate of recognition by sarod maestro Hafiz Ali Khan.
Shaggan Sahib currently lives in Iqbal Town, Lahore with his sons Qadir Shaggan and Mazhar Shaggan.
He continues to perform in public with youthful enthusiasm and the characteristic vigor of the Gwalior gayiki.
Bimalendu Mukherjee is world-renowned Hindustani classical sitar player, and a teacher of the Imdadkhani gharana,.
He also studied with Birendra Kishore Roy Chowdhury, the zamindar of Gouripur in present-day Bangladesh, who taught him the moribund sursringar.
Mukherjee is the father and teacher of sitar player Budhaditya Mukherjee.
His other students include Dr. Arvind V. Joshi, Aniruddha A. Joshi, Arun Moroney, Sanjoy Bandopadhyay, Pt.
Sudhir Kumar, Anupama Bhagwat, Joydeep Ghosh, Madhusudan RS, Ravi Sharma, Rajeev Janardan, Kamala Shankar, Brigitte Menon.
He should not be confused with Bimal Mukherjee, a sitar player of the same generation.
Udaka Vadya is an Indian musical instrument.
It is assumed either this musical instruments had been Jal tarang or similar to it.
This percussion instrument has been categorized in medieval musical treatise under Ghan Vadya.
This instrument has been mentioned in Vatsyayanas Kamasutra, also Sangeeta Parijata of the 17th century mentioned about this instrument.
The skill to play this instrument was one of the essential 64 kala to be learnt by a woman.
Pandit Prasun Banerjee was a Hindustani classical vocalist from the Patiala Gharana.
He was selected as an ` A ` grade artist by All India Radio.
In 1957 he married Meera Chatterjee and later both of them became disciples of Bade Ghulam Ali Khan.
He taught classical music at the Calcutta School of Music and received the ITC award and the Bhuwalka award.
Aman Ali Khan.
Ustad Aman Ali Khan ` Amar ' was an Indian classical vocalist and composer from the Bhendibazaar Gharana.
He brought many Carnatic ragas into Hindustani classical music.
Aman Ali learned Carnatic music under the guidance of Kalanidhi Bidaram Krishnappa, court musician of Mysore state.
He introduced rhythmic play and style of solfa singing to the Bhendibazaar gharana.
Aman Alis music was especially noted for its rhythmic sargam patterns, for which he derived inspiration from Carnatic music.
The great vocalist Amir Khan considered Aman Ali to be a major musical influence in his life.
Aman Ali left Bombay in 1947 and settled in Pune.
He contracted pneumonia while visiting Delhi for concerts and died on February 11, 1953.
His style influenced Amir Khan and Vasantrao Deshpande.
Kalyan Kumar Mukherjea was an authority on Indian classical music, particularly the Senia Shahjahanpur Gharana of Sarod.
He was also a mathematician.
Mukherjea was born in Calcutta in 1943.
His father, A K Mukherjea, was a successful barrister who rose to become a judge of the Supreme Court of India.
Justice Mukherjea was also a scholar of Indian philosophy, and had made significant contributions to Navya-Nyaya literature.
Kalyan thus grew up in a milieu that placed considerable significance on erudition and culture.
Justice Mukherjeas close friends included musicians like the sarod maestro Radhika Mohan Maitra.
Young Kalyan began training under Maitra in 1956.
He also studied with the sitarist, vocalist and composer, Prof D T Joshi.
Mukherjea has had a unique experience, doubling as a mathematician and an uncompromising classicist on the sarod.
As a mathematician.
Mukherjea obtained his undergraduate degree from Cambridge University, followed by a doctorate in mathematics from Cornell.
In 1968, he joined the mathematics faculty of UCLA.
His research interests primarily concerned topology.
He had to his credit authoritative publications in Fredholm manifolds and coincidence theory.
In collaboration with his erstwhile research student Rajendra Bhatia, he had also contributed to matrix analysis.
According to the American Mathematical Society collaboration distance calculator, his Erdos number is 4.
His work had spawned a significant body of further research, by his erstwhile students as well as colleagues and contemporaries.
As a musician.
Mukherjeas contribution to music is considerable if unconventional.
He has been recognised as a pedagogue, theorist and performer of merit.
Mukherjea performances have been limited.
His 25-year span as a performing artist saw him play about fifty concerts in all.
Additionally, from 1983 to 1990, Mukherjea was a regular broadcaster on All India Radio, Delhi.
It is 10.5 minutes long.
This recording has now been digitized and will be available soon from the Rajan Parrikar Music Archive.
Mukherjeas music is difficult to categorise under usual taxonomic classifications.
While rooted in tradition, it does not rigidly adhere to convention.
His approach values logic and aesthetic sensitivity above other considerations.
Paralytic stroke and other problems.
In the last phase of his life, Mukherjea led an active life for a person of his physical limitations.
Additionally, he continued to play an inspirational role in the lives of a number of young mathematicians.
One of Kalyans friends in Los Angeles was Jeffrey Pawlan.
After Kalyan moved back to India in 1976, they lost track of each other.
Jeffrey reconnected via email and phone in January 2009.
Here is additional information from an email that Kalyan wrote to Jeffrey on Jan. 25, 2009 :.
A lot of things have changed since 76, when I left L A.
In 1980 my marriage floundered and in May 81 I got an ex parte.
divorce from Deepa.
In 84 I married a Telugu poetess who also played.
the Carnatic Veena.
We had a son in 85, who is now in his penultimate.
year at the National Law School in Bangalore.
Sadly, my wife, Lalita,.
died last August from esophygial cancer.
As for other news : I had a retinal detachment in my right eye and lost.
all vision in that eye.
I am now completely blind : the left eye has.
stopped functioning through a combination of cataract and glaucoma.
sarode playing days ended in May 95 when I suffered a massive stroke.
which has left my left side completely paralyzed.
However since my.
left brain was unaffected, I continued to teach till I retired in.
October of 2005.
I had visited the US for about 3 months in 90 to.
lecture in Hawaii, UCLA and MIT.
I spent most of my time in New Jersey.
with my sister-in-law.
While there I recorded some music for India.
Archives Music of New York.
They released a CD based on these.
recordings in 2003.
You probably saw these mentioned when you googled.
In 2003 I also published a graduate level textbook of maths, the.
second edition of which I revised last year.
Needless to say, I. operate my computer using a text to speech synthesizer and.
a wonderful Audio Desktop written by an Indian-born engineer who now.
works for google.
With best regards,.
Prof. Mukherjea died on 31 March 2010, after suffering a massive heart attack a few weeks before.
Mukherjea, Kalyan : Differential Calculus In Normed Linear Spaces, American Mathematical Society, 2003.
Radhika Mohan Maitra - His Life and Times.
Raga Shuddha Kalyan, India Archive Music, 2003.
An All India Radio Recording.
Early life and training.
Tanmoy has been an ardent researcher and composer.
Designing a musical filigree between traditional Folk and Indian Classical along with time less Jazz and South American drumming.
Taaltantra takes you to the world of sounds and makes you experience a unique synthesis.
The name signifies sadhana or worship through rhythm.
Even though Taaltantra essentially is not dealing with just drumming, it has elements of various instrumentation coming full circle.
The world of sound is the forte of the band which is worth experiencing.
Tanmoy Bose is one of India 's best known Tabla virtuoso of this generation.
Besides these classical repertoires he has worked on numerous projects worldwide.
He has been a participating musician on three Grammy winning recordings Concert for George.
& Living room sessions-part one.
He has been successfully composing music for National Award winning feature films and various other documentaries and ballets.
KOLKATA FUSION FIESTA ... curated by TANMOY BOSE.
A unique partnership of music, dance, theatre, food, fashion is helping to define fusion for the 21st century.
Building on our distinctive heritage - and extensive experience in providing a platform for world culture to come together.
This is to embrace the new, the experimental and the unexpected.
Being the cultural capital, Kolkata stands to be the premier city of India in terms of innovation.
Pandit Trilok Gurtu, Pandit Vikku Vinayakram, Sree Shivamani, Sree Selva Ganesh, Gino Banks, karthik, Mother jane, taal inc and many others.
An effort first time of its kind being staged in Kolkata.
Vesh Tantra -- where timeless Raga 's pulsating rhythm and aesthetic fashion wear comes full circle.
Our lives revolve throughout the day in various moods at various points of time.
Likewise, nature, atmosphere and the Heaven above too change as the day grows older.
There is an old maxim -.
The apparel oft proclaims the man.
The project also gives out the scope of featuring national and international musicians from time to time.
Darker than the lumber room of the Freudian mind,.
Deeper than the deepest thunder.
Yet, sweeter than the cooing nightingale is a sound.
Ever heard of it ?.
Yes, it 's the sound of the soil.
You think only you can talk ?.
The soil is who you 're.
It is from where you came, and it is where we will go.
But only a few chosen can hear this sound.
The evening of 16 September is an echo of that voice.
It 's an evening where distance, time loose sense.
An evening of enchantment devoted to that one rhythm ... the rhythm of the heart and soul.
The rhythm of the ragas of the musician, the bells of the dancer, the words of the poet.
Come along with me experiencing the music of Baul n Beyond !.
This is my humble effort to showcase the best of world music.
The extended length of each track is a deliberate effort to create an environment of utmost listening pleasure.
The interweaving of instruments and voice is my interpretation of pure music.
It is for you to decide and endorse my dear listeners my version of World Music.
The music is a heady dosage of Timeless Indian Classical flavour that comes alive under the magic wand of director Pt.
Thus Timeless Indian Classical music seamlessly merges with choreographed movements with fashionable attire and jewellery, form, a never-seen-before experience.
The entire presentation is conceived and designed by Pt.
The Delhi Gharana is the oldest of all tabla gharanas, and is also the first to establish improvisation rules.
Siddhar Khan is the earliest available name found in historical records.
Even mention of the instrument Tabla is not found earlier than Siddhar Khan.
Khan, having been a pakhawaj player, was responsible for incorporating pakhawaj bols to the style.
However, the tabla, not the pakhawaj, is now the main instrument of the Delhi Gharana.
The Delhi tabla style is famous for its vast and rich repertoire of Qaidas.
Bols such as dha, tete, terekete and tinnakena are prominent.
The temperament and style of playing is generally soft and esoteric.
Jayashree R. Patnekar is a Hindustani classical vocalist.
She has received training in Gwalior, Jaipur and Kirana gharana.
She has received training from the great maestro Gajananrao Joshi.
Early life and Tutelage.
Jayashri Patanekars family is originally from Sawantvadi.
Patanekar was initiated into Hindustani classical music by the late Vithalrao Pai at Sawantwadi.
Her family shifted base to Goregaon in Mumbai.
Her father was a painter and later started working in secretariat.
When she was 16 she began learning under K. D. Gavkar of the Kirana gharana at Mumbai.
Gavkar guruji was disciple of Abdul Karim Khan.
Her recording was sent in Delhi and later in 1964, she came first in the entire country.
Her family decided to organize a small function to felicitate Gavkar guruji.
It was during this function she met Gajananrao Joshi, who was the chief guest of the program.
Gajananrao Joshi graciously agreed to train her.
It was under Gajananrao Joshi that she matured as a vocalist.
Joshi trained her in all aspects of the vocal music and nuances of Jaipur, Gwalior style of singing.
She also took guidance from Nivruttibua Sarnaik and Pandit Ratnakar Pai of Jaipur gharana.
A regular artiste of All India Radio, she has performed for AIR Mumbai and from 1977 onwards from AIR Dharwad.
Recognized as an A Grade artiste in 1983, she has performed for National Programmes as well as Tuesday Night Concerts.
The Hindu : Sangeeta Nritya Academy awards announced, Sangeeta Nritya Academy awards announced, October 2012.
Artist of the Month at ITC SRA, ITC Sangeet Research Academy, September 2007.
Video : Jayashri Patanekar performing at Gandharva Mahavidyalay, Pune on the occasion of 60th Birthday of Smt.
Madhuri Dongare, Madhuri Sangeet Vidyalay, Pune, July 31, 2010.
Mand or Maand is the famous style of singing in Rajasthan.
It is well recognized in classical circles and this style is very important in folk-songs of Rajasthan.
This is neither accepted as a full-fledged Raga nor is it reckoned among the freely rendered folk songs.
It is very near the Thumri or the Ghazal.
It is the exclusive contribution of Rajasthani folklore to the classical music of India.
The famous Rajasthani song Kesariya Balam is in the Mand style.
Gavri Devi also awarded for Rajasthan Ratan 2013.
Wajahat Khan is an Indian sarod player who has earned international acclaim since 1977.
He was born in Calcutta, India and now divides his time between London and India.
He has composed for and recorded with the Medici String Quartet.
His CDs include :.
Sami Yli-Sirnio is a Finnish guitarist who plays rock and metal.
He spent part of his life in Germany and thus has strong ties with the German metal scene.
German Rock Hard magazine featured him in 2007 as forgotten guitar hero.
For both Tiamat and Grip Inc., he played sitar, his second favourite instrument.
Yli-Sirnio originally joined experimental Finnish crossover legend Waltari in 1989, left the band 1995 to live in Germany and returned 2001.
So far he recorded 8 studio albums with Waltari.
Yli-Sirnio likes to explore other opportunities and has many guest appearances with other bands.
He also replaced injured Swiss guitarist Tommy Vetterli on some live dates for Teutonic thrash metal pioneers Kreator.
In 2001, Vetterli departed and Sirnio was asked to replace him on a permanent basis.
He also appears on the Live Kreation double-album and DVD, released in 2003.
This is generally done in medium-tempo as a bridge between the alap and taan portions.
Aman Ali Khan further refined its use and made it an integral part of the Bhendibazaar style.
Many of the khyal styles today use sargam to some extent, with the exception of the Jaipur-Atrauli and Gwalior styles.
Akhtari Bai Faizabadi or Begum Akhtar was a well known Indian singer of Ghazal, Dadra, and Thumri.
She received the Sangeet Natak Akademi Award for vocal music, and was awarded Padma Shri and Padma Bhushan by Govt.
She was given the title of Mallika-e-Ghazal.
Begum Akhtar was born in Bada Darwaza, Town Bhadarsa, Bharatkund, Faizabad District, Uttar Pradesh.
Her first public performance was at the age of fifteen.
This encouraged her to continue singing ghazals with more enthusiasm.
She cut her first disc for the Megaphone Record Company, at that time.
A number of gramophone records were released carrying her ghazals, dadras, thumris, etc.
Begum Akhtars good looks and sensitive voice made her an ideal candidate for a film career in her early years.
Her supreme artistry in light classical music had its moorings in the tradition of pure classicism.
She chose her repertoire in primarily classical modes : a variety of raags, ranging from simple to complex.
After the advent of talkie era in India, Beghum Akhtar acted in a few Hindi movies in thirties.
East India Film Company of Calcutta approached her to act in King for a Day and Nal Damayanti in 1933.
Like others of that era, she sang her songs herself in all her films.
She continued acting in the following years.
All the ghazals are available on Megaphone gramophone records.
Beghum Akhtar, meanwhile, left Bombay and returned to Lucknow.
In 1945, Akhtaribai married a barrister, Ishtiaq Ahmed Abbasi, and became known as Begum Akhtar.
She sang three ghazals and a dadra at Lucknow Radio Station.
She wept afterwards and returned to singing in concerts, a practice that lasted until her death.
Her voice matured with time, adding richness and depth.
She sang ghazals and other light classical pieces, singing them in her inimitable style.
She has nearly four hundred songs to her credit.
She was a regular performer on All India Radio.
She usually composed her own ghazals and most of her compositions were raag based.
The additional demand and stress that she put herself under resulted in her falling ill and was rushed to the hospital.
Rampur-Sahaswan gharana is a gharana of Hindustani classical music centered in the North - Uttar Pradesh towns of Rampur and Sahaswan.
Ustad Inayat Hussain Khan was the founder of this gharana.
The Rampur-Sahaswan gayaki is closely related to the Gwalior Gharana, which features medium-slow tempos, a full-throated voice and intricate rhythmic play.
The gharana style is also known for the diversity and intricacy of the taans, as well as tarana singing.
He was the recipient of the first Padma Bhushan award in singing.
Pandit Wamanrao Sadolikar was a Hindustani Classical vocalist of the Jaipur-Atrauli Gharana founded by his guru, Utd.
Wamanrao Sadolikar was born into a family of music lovers in Kolhapur.
As a teenager, he studied classical music under Pt.
V. D. Paluskar of the Gwalior Gharana.
He also had several film appearances.
He studied music under Utd.
Bhurji Khan and Utd.
Alladiya Khan, and he instructed his brother, Madhukar Sadolikar, his daughter Smt.
Shruti Sadolikar-Katkar, and Smt.
Jhaptal is one of the most famous talas of Hindustani music, after Teental.
It presents quite a different rhythmical structure from teental, unlike which, it is not symmetrical.
Jhaptal is a 10-beat pattern used in raga exposition.
It has ten beats in four divisions, of 2-3-2-3, the third of which is the khali, or open division.
To follow the tal the audience claps on the appropriate beat, which in jhaptal is beats 1, 3 and 8.
A wave of the hand indicates beat 6, the first beat of the khali section.
Series of Claps and Waves :.
clap, 2, clap, 2, 3, wave, 2, clap, 2, 3.
It has a characteristic pattern of bols.
Sugarless is the first single from Swami s 2009 Greatest Hits compilation 53431.
A music video for the song was released in late 2009, compiling live and rehearsed footage of the band.
Sadra is a vocal genre in Hindustani classical music, said to be the oldest forms in that musical tradition.
Brij Bhushan Kabra.
Brij Bhushan Kabra is an Indian musician who popularized the guitar as an instrument in Indian classical music.
Kabra was born in 1937 to Goverdhanlal Kabra in Jodhpur where he spent his youth.
Kabra then lived in Ahmedabad, Gujarat, learnt the instrument by imitating records, and later studied under Ali Akbar Khan.
He modified the guitar by adding sympathetic and drone strings.
The guitar was seldom used in Indian classical music, and his guitar playing gained popularity in the 1970s hippie culture.
Kabra recorded solo albums and concentrated on teaching since the 1990s but continued to perform.
Reenat Fauzia is a sitarist from Bangladesh.
Early life and family.
Reenat was born in 1967.
She began taking lessons on Sitar since her school days.
She is the granddaughter of Ustaad Ayet Ali Khan.
Reenat started her training in music lessons from her cousin Ustaad Shahadat Hossain Khan, a Sarode player of Bangladesh.
Later, she received her ` Guru-Shishya-Parampara ' music training from her cousin Ustaad Khurshid Khan, a Sitar preceptor.
She completed a five years certificate course on Sitar from ' Chhayanaut ', a music institute of Bangladesh.
Later on she joined the faculty of the same institute as a teacher.
After taking lessons on Sitar for twelve years, she joined participating in programs of Bangladesh Television and Bangladesh Betar.
She also makes appearance in stage for performing solo recital on Sitar.
During her visit to the US, UK, the Netherlands, Belgium, Germany, France, Philippines, and Hong Kong, she performed recitals on Sitar.
Reenat Fauzia has receivedAnanya Shirsho Dosh award in 2009.
` Haramanik ', with Dr. Mridulkanti Chakrobarty, was published by Laser Vision Limited.
The Indian santoor is an ancient string musical instrument native to Jammu and Kashmir, with origins in Persia.
A primitive ancestor of this type of instruments was invented in Mesopotamia.
The santoor is a trapezoid - shaped hammered dulcimer often made of walnut, with seventy two strings.
The special-shaped mallets are lightweight and are held between the index and middle fingers.
A typical santoor has two sets of bridges, providing a range of three octaves.
The Indian santoor is more rectangular and can have more strings than the Persian counterpart, which generally has 72 strings.
In ancient Sanskrit texts, it has been referred to as shatatantri vina.
In India, the santoor was used as an accompaniment instrument to the folk music of Kashmir.
It is played in a style of music known as the Sufiana Mausiqi.
The Sufi mystics used it as an accompaniment to their hymns.
The trapezoid framework is generally made out of either walnut or maple wood.
The top and bottom boards sometimes can be either plywood or veneer.
On the top board, also known as sound board, wooden bridges are placed, in order to seat stretched metal strings across.
The santoor is played while sitting in an asana called ardha-padmasana position and placing it on top of the lap.
It is played with a pair of light wooden mallets or hammers with both hands.
The santoor is a very delicate instrument and is very sensitive to light strokes and glides.
The strokes are played always on the strings either closer to the bridges or a little away from bridges.
Both styles result in different tones.
Kamalesh Maitra, often referred to by the title Pandit, was an Indian classical musician, composer and teacher.
He became the companys musical director and toured internationally with the troupe through to the mid 1970s.
Maitra settled in Berlin in 1977, where he performed and worked as a music teacher.
Maitra developed strong cultural ties with Berlin and continued to live and work in Germany until his death in 2005.
Background and formative years.
Kamalesh Maitra was born in Tangail in East Bengal in 1928.
and the family lacked the musical lineage commonly associated with Hindustani classical music.
Maitra spent his formative years in Calcutta, absorbing much of the European influence on the city.
At the age of twelve, he began playing a variety of hand drums, including tabla.
In 1950, Maitra joined Uday Shankar s ballet and dance company, as master drummer.
During a period of over twenty years, he toured the United States, China, Africa and Europe with the company.
International career and relocation to Berlin.
He worked again with Shankar on the soundtrack to the film Genesis, recorded in Paris.
The album features tabla accompaniment from Kumar Bose.
This was followed in 1996 by Tabla Tarang - Melody on Drums, issued in America by Smithsonian Folkways.
in November 1993, contains a performance of Raga Charukeshi on which music critic Ken Hunt praises Maitras playing as phenomenal.
Final years and legacy.
In September 2000, Maitra was awarded the Musicale Vitale prize at Berlins Werkstatt der Kulturen festival.
Maitra died on 22 April 2005, aged 76, in Kreischa, near the German city of Dresden.
Maitra is commonly referred to as the last master of the comparatively rare tabla tarang.
Pravin Godkhindi is a flute player following the Hindustani style of music.
He is a trained Electrical engineer and an alumnus of SDM College of Engineering and Technology, Dharwad.
He plays traditional Hindustani style of flute as well as contemporary.
His father Pt.Venkatesh Godkhindi is a renowned bansuri maestro, vocalist and A-grade radio artist, mainly serving AIR, Dharwad.
He started learning flute from his father at the age of three.
He has experimented with fusion of both Indian and Western music.
He has given many solo concerts in India and abroad.
He is playing a very significant role in popularizing the Indian Classical Music among the masses.
He has also performed at the World Flutes Festival at Mendoza, Argentina in September, 2010.
He was awarded the title Suramani at the age of 16.
He is the first southindian Bansuri artiste to be graded A-Top.
He is also the first Indian to perform on the 8 feet contrabass flute, which has renamed as GODs BANSI.
He has composed music for innumerable popular TV serials such as Garva, Malebillu.
He won the Aryabhata award for his composition of title track for Malebillu.
He has composed music for films like Beru and krishna nee late aagi baaro.
He has also composed music for several dance ballets and dramas.
He is known for his fusion albums and a raga based TV show Ragaranjini.
He has performed with veteran musicians like Ustad Zakir Hussain, Dr Balmurali Krishna, Pt.
Kadri Gopalnath, Pt.
Vishwa Mohan Bhatt, Vidwan Kumaresh and many others.
His album by name Raaga Rang in association with saxophone maestro Shri Kadri Gopalnath has been very popular.
Some of his popular albums are.
ECHOES OF THE VALLEY.
MOMENTS OF MELODY - with Guitar,.
MANGAL DHWANI - with Guitar and Santoor,.
SUMMER RAIN - with Santoor,.
PRAVIN RAFIQ - with Sitar,.
MILAAP - with Carnatic Flute,.
BRINDAVAN - with his father Pt.
MILAN - with Vid.
SOUNDARYA - with Vid.
TARUN PRAVIN - with Pandit Tarun Bhattacharya.
RAAG RANG - with Pt.
RAAG RANG - DVD-Live in Concert,.
YATRA - with Pt.
ORIENT IS ALIVE,.
A FEATHER DANCES ,.
Ritesh Das is a tabla player who has been studying, teaching and composing since the early 1970s.
He is the founder and artistic director of the critically acclaimed Toronto Tabla Ensemble.
Ritesh Das was born in Kolkata, West Bengal to parents Nrityacharya Prohlad Das and Smt.
He is the brother of renowned Kathak dancer, Pandit Chitresh Das.
Das graduated from Don Bosco High School in 1975 and went on to study commerce at City College, Kolkata from 1976-1978.
His musical studies began in 1972, studying tabla with Pandit Shankar Ghosh, vocals with T.L. Rana, and sitar with M.D. Mullick.
When Das was 22-years-old, he moved to Los Angeles, USA, to be a part of the AMAN Folk Ensemble.
Toronto Tabla Ensemble.
In 1987, Das moved to Toronto where he began teaching tabla on a full-time basis.
In 1991, he formed the The Toronto Tabla Ensemble.
They have performed at numerous jazz and folk festivals, and have also appeared on CBC News Network and Much Music.
In 2000, their album, Firedance, received a nomination for the Juno Award for Best Global Album.
Along with the Ensemble, Das has released six CDs to date and is currently composing music for the Ensembles seventh CD.
Das served on the music committee of the Toronto Arts Council from 1996-1998.
Maqbool Ahmed Sabri.
Maqbool Ahmed Sabri was a major Qawwali singer, and a leading member of the Sabri Brothers, a leading qawwali group.
His family belongs to the Sabriyya order of Sufism, hence the surname Sabri.
Maqbool furthered his knowledge of music under Ustad Fatehdin Khan, Ustad Ramzan Khan, and Ustad Latafat Hussein Khan Rampuri.
Their first recording, released in 1958 under the EMI Pakistan label, was the Urdu Qawwali, Mera Koi Nahin Hai.
Their later hits included Tajdaar-E-Haram and Balaghal Ula Be Kamalehi Saqia Aur Pila, O Sharabi Chorde Peena.
The kalaam is Lam Yaati Nazeeruka Fee Nazarin.
This can be read in the website :.
The Sabri Brothers is the only qawwali troupe which has a first class status in the Pakistan Television Corporation.
Popular film and recording artists in Pakistan, the Sabri Brothers troupe has toured Europe, Asia and the Middle East.
In 1970 the Government of Pakistan sent them to Nepal as representatives for the royal wedding.
They were the first exponents of Qawwali to the West, when they performed at New Yorks Carnegie Hall in 1975.
The New York Times review described the album as  the aural equivalent of dancing dervishes and the music of feeling.
On November 17, 2001 They performed in DOM at ON THE CARPET Oriental Culture Festival.
Several of their qawwalis have featured in films.
He is survived by his wife, Fatima, a son, Shumail, and his daughters, Ameema Shah, Gulerukh, Kanza Imaan and Tini.
He died in South Africa on Wednesday September 21, 2011 due to cardiac arrest.
C. R. Vyas.
Chintaman Raghunath Vyas, popularly known as C. R. Vyas, was an Indian classical singer.
He was renowned for singing khyal style.
C. R. Vyas was born in Osmanabad, Maharashtra, into a family of Sanskrit scholars and Hari kirtankars.
He was influenced by the singing, of his father and grandfather, episodes from Ramayan and Mahabharata.
He had his initial training from Govindrao Bhatambrekar of the Kirana gharana for a decade.
Then he learnt from Rajamrambuva Paradkar of Gwalior Gharana.
He also got the guidance from Yeshwantbuva Mirashi.
However, the influence of the Gwalior gayaki, is quite prominent.
His musical performance clearly shows his efforts, honesty and devotion towards music.
Music was penance for him and a pathway to the almighty.
Music was his first love, first commitment and his first passion.
He had been employed at ITC in a white collar job.
Music was not a primary vocation.
In his own words, In our time we did not think of earning either fame or money through music.
He was a leading artist in AIR and on TV.
He has participated in major musical events in India as well as abroad.
Among his disciples are Prabhakar Karekar, Kunda Veling, Sriram Parasuram, Sanjeev Chimmalgi, Ganapati Bhat and his son Suhas Vyas.
Jitendra Abhisheki was his student for almost ten years.
Contribution to music.
He was also engaged in research on traditional ragas and compositions.
The new ragas composed by him shows the height of his musical talant.
Shiv-abhogi, Dhanakoni-Kalyan, Sagera, Shuddha Ranjini, Sanjogiya and several other ragas composed by Vyas are popularly heard in concerts.
His personality had another wonderful flavour of compsing bandish.
He composed more than 200 bandishes in different ragas under the pen-name Gunijan.
As a tribute to his Guru Gunidas he started the Gunidass Sangeet Sammelan in 1977.
He has written a book Raag Sarita which sums up his great work in the field of music.
This album features Live recordings of Pandit Jasraj, Bhimsen Joshi & Vyas.
This double volume album will feature the great Hindustani classical vocalist Vyas.
The maestro has rendered in this album ragas like Bihag, Bimpalasi and Ahiri Lalit to name a few.
Live Recording In Mumbai.
Swara Samrat festival.
The event was dedicated to The Immortal Duo - Swara Samrat Ali Akbar Khan and Bharat Ratna Ravi Shankar.
The two-day-long musical extravaganza was organized by Shreeranjani music organization and led by Indian sarod maestro Tejendra Narayan Majumdar.
The festival was initially planned as an event to commemorate the 90th birth anniversary of Ali Akbar Khan.
Ravi Shankar was informed about the event.
Majumdar called this festival a dedication to The Immortal Duo - Swara Samrat Ali Akbar Khan and Bharat Ratna Ravi Shankar.
Some of most prominent classical musicians of India performed in this musical extravaganza.
Aashish Khan played Sarod with Swapan Chaudhuri.
Girija Devi performed with Samar Saha and Zakir Hussain performed with Dilshad Khan.
Aditya Kalyanpur is an Indian Tabla player.
He belongs to the Punjab gharana.
Early life and background.
Aditya Kalyanpur was born in Mumbai, India.
He is a commerce graduate.
Aditya Kalyanpur was initially known for his debut performance with his guru Zakir Hussain for the Wah Taj !.
commercial when he was 11 years old.
He has also accompanied Carnatic performers including T. N. Krishnan, N. Ramani, U. Shrinivas, and Lalgudi Krishnan.
Currently on tour with AR Rahman for his JAI HO World Tour !.
Pandit Balwant Rai Bhatt is a noted Indian composer and musician of Hindustani vocal music.
He is also known as Bhavrang.
Early life and background.
Balwant Rai Bhatt was born in Bhavnagar, Gujarat to Smt.
Harkunvar and Shri Gulabrai Bhatt on 23 September 1921.
Bhatt is a disciple of Pandit Omkarnath Thakur of Gwalior Gharana.
He taught at the university for 31 years.
The music institution grew and evolved through the years, and is now the Faculty of Performing Arts.
Apart from being an educator, he is known as an exceptionally talented composer.
He is considered a complete Vaggeyakaar, one who composes both Vak or the word and the Geya or the melody.
He has a penchant for layakari, and many of his compositions incorporate intricate laya patterns.
Many of his compositions have been published in book form as the three volumes of Bhavrang Lahari.
Bhavrang is his pen name.
He edited the Sangeetanjali series of books that were authored by Pandit Omkarnath Thakur.
A 3-volume book series called Bhavrang Lahari contains many of his compositions.
Balwant Rai Bhatt has been awarded Padma Shri by the Government of India in 1990.
He was awarded Sangeet Natak Akademi Puraskar in 2004.
He was honored with the prestigious Kalidas Samman in the year 2007-08.
prof. chittaranjan jyotishi.
Khadim Hussain Khan.
Khadim Hussain Khan was an Indian singer born in Atrauli, Uttar Pradesh, India.
Initiated into music by his father Altaf Hussain Khan, he went on to learn from his grand uncle Ustad Kallan Khan.
They were both court musicians of the Jaipur Kingdom.
Khadim had a long and arduous training for 12 years, practicing for more than 12 hours every day.
He moved to Bombay in the late twenties and was part of the Mumbai music circles for many decades.
He was a superb teacher.
Famous for his Layakari, it was difficult to grasp for the untrained.
He was an AIR artist from its inception, but his passion and lifes mission was teaching.
He was a great composer, under the pen name Sajan Piya.
He composed 110 choice bandishes.
His students set up a trust under the name Sajan Milap in the seventies.
His younger brother Ustad Latafat Hussain, the late smt.
Saguna Kalyanpur, and Smt.
Lalith J. Rao are disciples of his.
Ananda Gopal Bandopadhyay.
Ananda Gopal Bandopadhyay is an Indian tabla Maestro from Benaras Gharana.
His father, the late Shri Radha Gopal Bandopadhyay, was an amateur vocalist.
He is a disciple of Thumri Maestro Pandit Mahadev Prasad Mishra.
Ustad Rais Khan is a Pakistani sitarist born in Indore, India.
From his maternal side, Rais Khan is a descendant of great sitarists of Etawah Gharana.
His mother was the elder sister of Vilayat Khan.
Rais Khan has been influenced by his maternal uncles style.
The sitar he plays is Gandhar-Pancham Sitar - which was standardized and designed by Vilayat Khan himself.
He gave his first public concert at Sunderbai Hall in the presence of the then Governor of Bombay Sir Maharaja Singh.
Like Vilayat Khan, he often sings and demonstrates compositions.
He has been touring extensively throughout the world.
For sometime, Khansaheb had stopped playing concerts of classical music.
He returned in the 1980s and was invited by Ali Akbar Khan to perform in California.
Rais Khan moved to Pakistan after marrying a Pakistani lady.
He has four sons : Suhael Khan, Cezanne Khan, Farhan Khan and Huzoor Hasnain Khan.
Farhan sometimes performs with him.
Niladri Kumar is an Indian classical and fusion musician.
He performed on the sitar from a young age and toured and released albums as an adult.
He created a unique instrument, a modified sitar, which he named zitar.
Born to sitar player Kartick Kumar, a disciple of Ravi Shankar, he was considered a child prodigy.
He started learning sitar under his father at the age of four.
Kumar gave his first public performance at the age of six at Sri Aurobindo Ashram in Pondicherry.
Niladri Kumar began his career with music directors Laxmikant-Pyarelal in the late 1980s.
He was part of the Masters of the Percussion tour alongside Zakir Hussain.
Kumar has also worked with various music directors in Hindi cinema, including A.R. Rahman, Shankar-Ehsaan-Loy and Pritam.
Niladri was conferred the Sangeet Natak Akademi s Ustad Bismillah Khan Yuva Puraskar, awarded to young musicians, in March 2007.
Niladri has also won MTV Immies award for the Best Classical/Fusion Instrumental for his album If.
Kumar has created a unique instrument, the zitar, which is a combination of sitar and guitar.
The concept initiated from a traveling sitar, which was modified by Kumar to create rock guitar sound out of it.
Kumar reduced the number of strings on the instrument from 20 to five.
He also added an electric pickup inside the instrument so that it would sound more like a guitar.
His first full album composed using the instrument, titled Zitar, was released in 2008.
Kumar wrote the first track for the album Priority in 2003.
Over the next five years he improved the track and subsequent track by gauging audience reaction during live performances.
He improvised the tracks adding components from various genres such as rock, electronic and lounge.
Omkarnath Thakur was an influential Indian educator, musicologist, and Hindustani classical singer.
He is famously known as Pranav Rang, his pen-name.
Early life and training.
Thakur was born 1897 in a Jahaj village in the Princely State of Baroda, into a poor military family.
His grandfather Mahashankar Thakur was had fought in the Indian Rebellion of 1857 for Nanasaheb Peshwa.
His father, Gaurishankar Thakur was also in the military, employed by Maharani Jamnabai of Baroda, where he commanded 200 cavalrymen.
When he was fourteen his father died.
Thakur soon became an accomplished singer in the style of the Gwalior gharana started accompanying his guru and other musicians.
Though later on in his career, he developed his own distinct style.
Eventually, he made his concert debut in 1918, though continued his training under his guru, Paluskar, until his death in 1931.
Thakur was made the principal of a Lahore branch of Paluskars Gandharva Mahavidyalaya in 1916.
In 1919, he returned to Bharuch and started his own music school, Gandharva Niketan.
His performances of patriotic song Vande Mataram were a regular feature of annual sessions of the Indian National Congress.
Thakur toured Europe in 1933 and became one of the first Indian musicians to perform in Europe.
During this tour, he performed privately for Benito Mussolini.
Thakurs wife Indira Devi died the same year and he began to concentrate exclusively on music.
He wrote books on Indian classical music and its history.
Thakur performed in Europe until 1954 and received the Padma Shri in 1955 and the Sangeet Natak Akademi Award in 1963.
He retired in 1963 and was awarded honorary doctorates from Banaras Hindu University in 1963 and Rabindra Bharati University in 1964.
Pandit Vikash Maharaj is an Indian musician, a player of the sarod.
Background and career.
Vikash Maharaj is from the 14th generation of musicians in the Banaras Gharana in Varanasi, India.
Vikash runs the Music Institute of Benares in Varanasi, India.
Georges first instrument was the harmonica.
At the age of 6 he appeared on Ted Macks Original Amateur Hour performing a duet with his older brother, Hampton.
As a student at Hollywood High School, he took up the flute in the school marching band and orchestra.
The band made an appearance on the 1960s sitcom F Troop as The Bed Bugs.
They were also featured in an episode of Gomer Pyle, U.S.M.C., Lost, the Colonels Daughter.
Although not visible in the scene inside the A Go-Go club, their music can be heard playing loudly.
They received credits at the end of the episode as The Factory Lowell-Warren-Martin-Rich, Courtesy of Universal Records.
Following the disbanding of The Factory, George briefly joined The Standells.
During this period, he would absorb Zappas autocratic leadership style and avant garde - influenced conceptual/procedural-oriented compositional methods.
He earned his first production credit on Permanent Damage, an album recorded by groupie group The GTOs.
After leaving the Mothers of Invention, George invited fellow musicians to form a new band, which they named Little Feat.
George usually played lead guitar and focused on slide guitar.
When not working with Little Feat, George lent his talents as a session player.
In 1976 he played on Jackson Browne s The Pretender.
The groups 1978 live album Waiting for Columbus became their best-selling album.
On June 15, 1979, George began a tour in support of his solo album.
A postmortem report later stated that heart failure was the cause of death.
Georges body was cremated in Washington, D.C. on August 2.
His ashes were flown back to Los Angeles, where they were scattered from his fishing boat into the Pacific Ocean.
Prabha Atre is an Indian classical vocalist.
Prabha was born to Abasaheb and Indirabai Atre in Pune.
Listening to those lessons inspired Prabha to learn classical music.
Her music training was in the Guru-shishya tradition.
She learnt classical music initially from Vijay Karandikar.
She then learnt from Sureshbabu Mane and Hirabai Badodekar from the Kirana school for advanced training.
She acknowledges the influence of two other greats, Ustad Amir Khan and Bade Ghulam Ali Khan, on her gayaki.
While studying music, Prabha finished college courses in science and law to receive degrees in both of those disciplines.
She later also earned a Ph.D. in music.
Her doctoral thesis was titled Sargam, and pertained to the use of sol-fa notes in Indian classical music.
Prabha Atre is currently one of the senior vocalists in the country representing the Kirana Gharana.
She has contributed to popularizing Indian classical vocal music at global level.
She is competent in different musical genres such as Khayal, Thumri, Dadra, Ghazal, geet, Natyasangeet, and bhajans.
She had a short stint as a singing stage-actress in the early days of her career.
Prabha Atre has authored books on the various aspects of music that are especially relevant to the present day performance.
Award in 1989 is a classic example of her analytical approach and original thinking.
Her second book ` Swaralee published in 1992 also received great accolades.
Madhya Pradesh Govt.
Her books Swaranginee and Swaranjanee carries more than 400 popular compositions in classical and light classical music.
A book in English about music and musicians Along the Path of Music is also released.
A book of poems in Marathi ` Antahswar by Dr. Atre brings out a different aspect of her creative personality.
4th edition of Swarmayee and 3rd edition of Suswaralee is Published in 2011.
Prabha has been giving private lessons to students since 1969.
In 1976, Prabha received the Acharya Atre Award for music.
Jagatguru Shankaracharya conferred the title Gaan-Prabha on her.
The Government of India conferred on her Padma Shree in 1990 and Padma Bhushan in 2002.
The first four months of 2002 was very special for her, she received four awards, including the Padma Bhushan.
State government Award to her book Swarmayee.
From the year 2011 Swarayoginee Dr. Prabha Atre Rashtriya Shaastreeya Sangeet Puraskar instituted by Tatyasaheb Natu Trust and Gaanvardhan Pune.
Balakrishnabuwa Ichalkaranjikar was an Indian vocalist of Khayal - genre of Hindustani classical music.
He learnt under Gwalior gharana, and brought its singing style to Maharashtra, also became the founder of Khayal music in Maharashtra.
Early life and background.
Balakrishnabuwa Ichalkaranjikar was born in Maharashtra.
He travelled to Gwalior, then Mecca of Khayal style in Indian Classical Music, and learned under Vasudeorao Joshi.
He then returned to Maharashtra, and settled near Miraj because its climate suited him.
Buwas slow, majestic singing was marked by gravitas.
His chief disciples include Vishnu Digambar Paluskar, his own son Annabuwa, Anant Manohar Joshi, Mirashi buwa and Vamanbuwa Chafekar.
Annabuwa predeceased him.
His sons death caused him great sadness in his final years.
Life and studies.
Doctoral Dissertation : A Comparison of Greek and Indian Dramatic Theories as Given in the Poetics and the Natyasastra.
In his own words :.
After his graduation, a series of grants and programs enabled him to pursue his cultural interests :.
In 1995 he was also a member of the Jury for the International Onasis Prize for Drama.
He speaks Sanskrit, Hindi, English and Greek.
He has also directed major lectures and directed seminars.
He writes for research journals and national newspapers on cultural and educational issues.
In 1976, he married Yukti, and the couple had two sons : Abhinav and Udayan.
In August 2010 he became the grandfather of a boy named Atharva, after the 4th Veda.
He retired from the University of Delhi in Nov. 2011 but continues to lecture at other forums.
Writings and ideas.
His first book, Dramatic Concepts - Greek and Indian, was directly inspired by his Greek travels and studies.
This study offers a fresh approach in comparing ancient Greek and Indian dramatic theories.
It demonstrates that hieropraxis was basically different from post-Renaissance European drama which was entirely secular in content and Realistic in presentation.
An excerpt from a review by David L. Gitomer :.
DAVID L. GITOMER, Comparative Drama, Kalamazoo.
And excerpts from another review, by Richard Schechner, TDR.
272-73 This is an insight not previously proposed by anyone, a definite advance in performance theory.
Gupts book is important, examining in depth questions often raised but rarely pursued.
Frequently, those making comparative studies are more knowledgeable about one side or the other.
Radical assertions concerning Indo-European or Eurasian theatre are in the air but rarely brought down to the scholarly earth.
Schechner, Richard, TDR, Cambridge, Mass. v41, n2 Summer ,1997 :153.
Then followed the translation of the 28th chapter of the Natyashastra, devoted to the musical scales.
An excerpt from the introduction :.
it is sometimes argued that presents a music meant for theatre and not for the independent art.
Such issues, however, have been raised in the world of Indian music only.
It begins with an announcement, I shall now enunciate the rules relating to the playing of instruments.
For the ancients, pada or song was the beginning of music, strings were the middle and drumming was the end.
Music as merely notes and rhythm, svara and tala, was inconceivable.
The instruments emulated the human voice and the drums followed its rhythmic statement.
This pattern obtains even now in Indian music.
In his review of the book, Wayne Howard writes :.
this is a book that greatly advances our understanding of ancient Indian music.
India - A Culture Decline Or Revival ?.
The author wishes to examine if that is true or if a cultural decline set in soon after.
While examining the state of affairs the author also suggests a way for the pursuit of happiness through unselfish transcendence.
An excerpt from the preface of the book :.
Bharat Gupt is a vocal activist for the revival of Indian Heritage and its comeback in the educational system.
The following is an excerpt from his polemic article Who is afraid of Sanscrit ?.
India alone excels in belittling its classical heritage as it has unfortunately codified it as its  Hindu past.
Within the western world these approaches were countered first by Orientalists and later by Modernists, both opponents of Newtonian rationalism.
This dichotomy continued well into the semi-century of independence and flourishes strong as ever.
The editors note, in the introduction :.
Major public lectures on Natyashastra.
AT KALAKSHETRA CHENNAI.
6-10 Feb 2012, expounding on Sanskrit text and Abhinavabharati  25 hours.
Umakant Gundecha and Ramakant Gundecha, known as the Gundecha Brothers, are leading Dagarvani dhrupad singers.
They always sing together.
Early life and background.
Gundecha Brothers were born in Ujjain into a Jain family.
They studied at the local Madhav Music College.
Umakant has a post-graduate degree in music and economics and Ramakant in music and commerce.
They moved to Bhopal in 1981, for training under dhrupad master, Zia Fariddudin Dagar and his brother Zia Mohiuddin Dagar.
Umakant and Ramakant have good voices with strong lower registers.
They have worked to expand the dhrupad repertoire by incorporating texts by Hindi poets such as Tulsidas, Padmakar and Nirala.
They have set up a dhrupad institute outside Bhopal where they teach students from all over the world.
Recordings and fellowships.
They have recorded many cassettes and CDs by H.M.V, Music Today, Rhythm House, IPPNW Concerts Berlin, Navras and Audio Rec London.
They have received M.P. Govt.
of Madhaya Pradesh and Dagar Gharana Award by Mewar Foundation in 2001.
Raga - Bihag, Night Melody - Raga.
IPPNW - CONCERTS, Germany -1995.
Raga - Komal Rishabh Asawari.
Sense world Music, UK - 2003.
Firoz Dastur also Feroze Dastur was an eminent vocalist of Kirana Gharana and a film actor.
Dastur was born in Mumbai to Parsi family.
Dastur was part of Indian Film Industry in 1930s, acting in a few films by Wadia Movietone and other film banners.
But his first love was Indian Classical Music.
He was the disciple of Sawai Gandharva, whose other disciples were Bhimsen Joshi and Gangubai Hangal.
and a regular performer at Sawai Gandharva Music Festival for several years, well into his late 80s.
Dastur died in May 2008 in Mumbai after a brief illness.
He was 89.
His disciples include Sudha Divekar, Achyut Abhyankar, Sujan Rane, Usha Deshpande, Avinash Tawde, Vinayak Prabhu, and Girish Sanzgiri.
Rajeev Janardan, is a Hindustani classical sitar player of the Imdadkhani gharana, taught by Bimalendu Mukherjee.
He lives in New Delhi.
Jaranadan comes from Kerala, and started to learn the guitar at the age of 12 when living in Benares.
He trained as a singer before switching to the sitar, studying with Mukherjee.
At the age of 15, Janardan won the All India Music Competition.
In his playing, he strives to blend gayaki ang and tantra ang.
It is characterised by accurate meend, advanced surlagao, fast and clear taankari in gat and dirdir and chikari variations in jhala.
Janaradan also has a masters degree in psychology.
Gabby La La.
Gabby La La, is a vocalist and multi-instrumentalist, signed to Prawn Song Records.
Her music is self described as fun, unique, crazy kooky.
Biography and career.
She was the second non-Primus act to be signed to the label.
This album featured Gabby on sitar, ukulele, accordion, theremin and vocals and Les Claypool on bass, drums and percussion.
The two produced the album at Rancho Relaxo Studios, beginning with Gabby La Las concepts and lyrics.
La La also toured for several years as an official member of Les Claypools Fancy Band.
La La got her true start at the age of five when she began studying piano.
She later adopted the habit of switching instrument on a whim which led to her accumulation of instruments and musical skill.
She found her natural talent with the sitar and also a teacher who believed in her potential as a musician.
Before completing the program, La La spent 4 months studying with one of Akbars senior students, Partho Chatterjee, in Calcutta India.
After nearly 10 years of study, La La started to write her own music inspired by the creativity at CalArts.
In 2010, La La was the featured artist at The Interzone Festival in Serbia.
Johar Ali Khan.
Johar Ali Khan is a Classical Indian violinist.
He is the son and disciple of the Late Ustad Gohar Ali Khan of Rampur, one of the greatest violin genius.
He belongs to the Patiala Gharana of Rampur.
He is the only living classical violinist from Patiala Gharana after his father - late Ustatd Gohar Ali Khan.
He also represented India at the SAARC Summit in Bangladesh.
Johar Ali Khan has composed music for the South Pacific Games on behalf of ICCR, New Delhi.
Johar Ali Khan has performed thousands of Hindustani Violin concerts, in different parts of India, several major cities, towns and villages.
He has performed for several government organizations and non-government organizations, including Radio & television.
He was a member of advisory committee and general assembly of Indian Council for Cultural Relations.
He has created his own band Sargam having members belonging to traditional musical families and Gharanas.
He has also performed in Taj Mahotsav and Jhansi Mahotsav and a regular performer of musical NGO SPIC MACAY.
As a disciple of Pandit Jitendra Abhisheki, he has an illustrious pedigree, and his thrilling performances bear this out.
Early life and background.
Mahesh was born and raised in a musical family in Pune, Maharashtra, India.
He began his early music education under the guidance of his mother Smt.
She had Masters in Indian Classical Music and was a disciple of Veena Sahasrabuddhe.
At the age of 6 he started learning music formally from his mother Smt.
Later he learned from Shri Purushottam Gangurde.
Despite his young age, Mahesh was chosen as the disciple of legendary Pandit Jitendra Abhisheki in 1991.
During that time, he accompanied his guru Pt.
Jitendra Abhisheki as a vocal support in prestigious concerts all across India.
Currently he is receiving vocal guidance from Shri Shounak Abhisheki.
Mahesh has performed in over 1000 concerts of Indian Classical and Semi-Classical Vocal in India, US, UAE, UK and Southeast Asia.
Recently he performed with a well known composer and saxophonist in Jazz George Brooks and groove-master bassist Kai Eckhardt.
Since early 2010, Mahesh has been playing the central character in Katyar Kaljat Ghusli, the evergreen Sangeet Natak.
He has been honored with Akhil Bharatiya Marathi Natya Parishad Award for his role in this play.
Mahesh debuted at the prestiguous Sawai Gandharva Music Festival in 2011 which received generous appreciation.
Mahesh is determined to spread awareness and education about Indian classical music in the western world.
Recently he performed with a well known composer and saxophonist in Jazz George Brooks and groove-master bassist Kai Eckhardt.
He has also been invited to give talks at institutions like Commonwealth Club and INKTalks.
Currently Mahesh is teaching music actively to over 100 students in the San Francisco Bay Area.
Sulochana Brahaspati is one of the noted vocalist of Hindustani classical music.
She is a vocalist and an exponent of the Rampur-Sahaswan gharana.
She learnt music from Pandit Bholanath Bhat and Ustad Mushtaq Hussain Khan of Rampur-Sahaswan gharana.
Later she received intensive training from her guru, and later her husband, Acharya K.C.D. Brahaspati.
A large number of his compositions - Khayals, Thumris, Tappas and Dadras - are part of her portfolio.
She is also an accomplished teacher and musicologist and has published books including Raga Rahasya.
Pandit Motiram Pandit Maniram Sangeet Samaroh.
Pandit Motiram Pandit Maniram Sangeet Samaroh is an annual Indian classical music festival held at Chowmahalla Palace in Hyderabad, India.
Maharaja Kishan Prasad Bahadur took his father to Chowmahalla Palace.
The entry to the event is free.
The will be free.
The 2010 festival.
The 38th annual festival was held at Chowmahalla Palace from 29 November to 1 December.
It was held on 29 and 30 November.
Pandit Jasraj performed on the last day of the festival.
Pandit Jasraj, Shahid Parvez, Shashank, Vocalist Pritam Bhattacharjee, Vijay Ghate, Ajay Pohankar, Manjari Chaturvedi and Sanjeev Abhyankar.
The festival was hosted by Durga Jasraj.
Pandit Jasraj performed on the first day, 30 November.
Niladri Kumar and zitar, Taufiq Qureshi, Pandit Dinesh, Anand Sharma and Vijay Ghate, bhajan singer Anup Jalota performed at the festival.
Hariprasad Chaurasia, Vikku Vinayakram and Selva Ganesh, percussion wizards, Mandolin U. Shrinivas and Pandit Jasraj performed.
Ustad Amjad Ali Khan, Raja Kale, Padma Subramanyam and Dr. L. Subramaniam.
Pandit Samta Prasad was an Indian classical musician and tabla player from the Benares gharana.
He was the son of Pandit Hari Sunder, also known as Bacha Mishra, his grandfather was Pt.
Jagannath Mishra, and his ancestors included Pt.
Pratap Maharaj, also known as Gudai Maharaj.
of India in 1991.
Early life and training.
His preliminary taalim began with his father, who died when Samta was seven.
Thereafter, he took the discipleship of Pt.
Bikku Maharaj, himself a disciple of Pt.
Baldev Sahai, and began to practise for long hours daily.
Throughout his career, he performed in various parts of India, such as Kolkata, Mumbai, Chennai and Lucknow.
He also represented the Indian cultural team while abroad, in such places as France, Russia and Edinburgh.
Rafi in the film Meri Surat Teri Aakhen until the arrival of Pandit Samta Prasad from Banaras.
He died in May 1994 in Pune, India.
He was on a visit to Pune to conduct a coaching workshop organized by Naad Roop.
Awards and recognitions.
He achieved the Padma Bhushan in 1991.
^ Life history of the Pandit Gudai Maharaj.
Pandit Manas Chakraborty was an Indian classical vocalist.
He belonged to Kotali Gharana started by his father and guru Sangeetacharya Tarapada Chakraborty.
He was a writer and composer.
He used the pseudoname ` Sadasant ' or ` Sadasant Piya ' to write Bandish.
He composed many Bengali songs.
Joseph J. Palackal.
Joseph J. Palackal is an Indic musicologist, singer and composer, with special interests in the musical traditions of the Indian Christians.
He is also the Founder-President of the Christian Musicological Society of India.
Abel Periyappuram, the founder of the Kalabhavan and the key in the transition of the Syro-Malabar liturgy from Syriac to Malayalam.
Palackal is the lead vocalist for about 30 works in Malayalam, Hindi, Sanskrit, English, and Aramaic.
Palackal published several research papers on music in English and Malayalam.
He also published illustrations of various facets of their music, culture, and history ; these include.
He was, for a time, Dean of Studies at the Kalabhavan under Fr.
He also founded Nadopasana, a society for the promotion of Indian classical and choral music, at Upasana Centre, Thodupuzha.
He lives in New York City.
One reviewer has declared Reynolds an under-rated master.
Reynolds was born in Wiesbaden, Germany, where his father, a career military man, was stationed.
He says he hails from nowhere, because the family moved so often.
Both parents were extremely devout Christians and he says he grew up with Christian music all around him.
Reynolds explains : I played there in Charlottesville all the time.
Dave Matthews was the bartender.
I knew the rest of his band way before that.
We played together in Charlottesville since I moved there in 1981.
I would play with LeRoi Moore and Carter Beauford.
Dave moved to town in 1987.
When the Dave Matthews Band started, I already had my own band.
I told him,  Ive got a band and I kind of like the way it is.
You should start your band.
I could see that he needed to do his own thing.
In 1993, Reynolds and Dave Matthews started playing a few acoustic duo sets.
During these sets, Reynolds would play between one to four of his own pieces that spanned his own catalog of work.
In 1999, coinciding with the release of the 40-date tour, Live at Luther College was released.
After a short break, Reynolds toured again with Matthews as a duo in 2003.
They played several shows together in 2006 and 2007.
Reynolds joined Matthews on a mini-tour of Europe in February and March 2007.
It also includes two of Reynolds own songs ; You are My Sanity and Betrayal.
The Radio City show was also released in high definition on Blu-ray Disc.
As of the summer tour of 2013, he is still a full time member of the Dave Matthews Band.
Dave Matthews & Friends.
Dave Matthews & Friends performed occasional shows again in 2004, 2005, and 2006.
Both Matthews and Reynolds have an open taping policy that additionally extends to TR3, which is available on his website.
On Oct. 4 2009 Reynolds performed with Matthews in St. Louis, Missouri to support Farm Aid in 2009.
Reynolds has a son Josef, born in February 1982 with his wife, Linna.
In 1995, he and girlfriend Diane Thomas had a daughter, Eura.
They resided in New Mexico with her son Jostin Bileyu.
In 2008, Thomas moved with their children to North Carolina.
Tim followed, to be near his daughter Eura.
He currently resides in North Carolina, after living for 17 years in Virginia and several years in New Mexico.
In addition to production, remixing, and DJ work, Kale is known for his tabla drumming and film composition.
Kale took an interest in drums and eventually became a tabla player.
Kales father introduced Kale to a broad range of music, which included traditional Indian music, classical, rock, and even early hip-hop.
From this broad range of influences, Kale, who was self-taught, developed his own style, which eventually led to his electric tabla.
Tabla Beat Science.
In 2000, Bill Laswell founded Tabla Beat Science, inviting Kale, along with Zakir Hussain, Talvin Singh, Trilok Gurtu and Sultan Khan.
Together, the group released Tala Matrix that year.
These events attracted the attention of San Francisco label Six Degrees Records.
Kales third album, 2006s Broken English, was predominantly set to English lyrics, a shift from his previous albums.
His follow-up Breathing Under Water, released in 2007, was the result of a two-year collaboration with sitar instrumentalist Anoushka Shankar.
In 2011, Kale released Cinema, which draws influence from Kales experiences in composing for Bollywood.
Kale has composed for crossover and Bollywood films including Chutney Popcorn, Indian Cowboy, Ocean of Pearls, and Pyaar Impossible !.
His tracks have also been featured in shows such as HBO s True Blood and Real Time with Bill Maher.
Two of his songs were included in as sample music in Windows Vista by Microsoft.
Kale also worked with Midival Punditz on a rescoring of Bruce Lees Enter the Dragon.
With Tabla Beat Science.
Abhik Mukherjee is an Indian classical sitar artist of the Etawah gharana.
Abhik began his sitar training at the age of six in Kolkata, India.
He has performed and given workshops in India, the United States, Singapore, Taiwan, Switzerland, Germany, Italy, Suriname, and Argentina.
Abhik is an active member of Brooklyn Raga Massive, an Indian classical music organization based in New York City.
Shenai is similar to South India s nadaswaram.
This tubular instrument gradually broadens towards the lower end.
It usually has between six and nine holes.
It employs one set of quadruple reeds, making it a quadruple reed woodwind.
By controlling the breath, various tunes can be played on it.
Origin of the shehnai.
The ancestor of North Indian shehnai is believed to be from Persian Surna.
The shehnai is thought to have been developed by improving upon the pungi.
There are varying legends of the shehnais origin.
In one of these, a shah initially banned the playing of the pungi in his court due to its shrill sound.
A barber, belonging to a family of musicians, improved on it and created the shehnai.
In other variants of the legend, the shehnai was.
Another theory of the origin of the shehnai is that the name is a modification of the word sur-nal.
The word nal/nali/nad is used in many Indian languages to mean pipe or reed.
Sometimes, two shehnais can be tied together, making it a double shawm similar to the ancient Greek aulos.
Whereas the counterparts played in West Indian and Coastal Karnatka are indigenous to the territory.
Shehnai Players of India.
Some exponents of the shehnai are :.
The composition in this raga appear on 142 pages from page numbers 347 to 489.
Asa is a very old raga which was once popular in the Punjab but seldom heard in concerts today.
In the Guru Granth Sahib s Ragmala this is a ragini of raga Megha.
However, today it is assigned to the Bilaval thata.
Asa is a devotional raga for the cold season and is performed in the early morning just before sunrise.
However, it is also known as a twilight melody with a calm mystical mood.
Asa is a crooked raga in that approaches to certain notes have to be made from a set position.
This raga may have originated in Maharashtra about the time of the major Muslim invasions.
Its pleasing sound made it suitable for bhajans by the Hindu devotees.
Tati is a single stringed Naga traditional musical instrument invented and used by the Naga people since time immemorial.
It is popularly used by the Angami Nagas and Chakesang Nagas to sing traditional folk.
The instrument measuring about 3-4 foot in length is made of a dried caved-out Bottle Gourd.
A string is tied between the two ends of the pole over the film covered caved Bottle Gourd.
Albela Sajan Aayo Re.
Albela Sajan Aayo Re is a classical Hindi song popularized by Ustad Sultan Khan of Indore gharana.
Ustad Sultan Khan sang it in the Bollywood movie, Hum Dil De Chuke Sanam along with Shankar Mahadevan and Kavitha Krishnamurthy.
The Gwalior Gharana is one of the oldest Khyal Gharanas.
The rise of the Gwalior Gharana started with the reign of the great Mughal emperor Akbar.
The main musician in the court at the time was Ustad Bade Mohammad Khan who was famous for his taanbaazi.
Both Ustad Bade Mohammad Khan and Ustad Nathan Pir Bakhsh belonged to the same tradition of Shahi Sadarang.
Some sources believe that Ustad Nathan Pir Bakhsh settled in Gwalior and evolved the style features that led to this gharana.
Others claim that individuals named Nathan Pir Bakhsh and Nathu Khan founded the gharana.
He arrived in Gwalior with his maternal grandsons Haddu Khan and Hassu Khan.
Another great khyal singer, also originally from Lucknow, was Ustad Bade Mohammed Khan who brought the Taan into khyal singing.
Haddu Khan and Hassu Khan further enhanced the style of the Gwalior gharana as we recognize it today.
Hassu Khan died prematurely.
The asthayi section is sung twice before the antara, to be followed by swar-vistar in medium tempo.
The behlava is divided into the asthayi and antara.
Bol-Taans entail the formation of melodic sequences with the words of the song.
The other Taans, including the Gamak, follow.
Both Dhrupad and khyal singing evolved in Gwalior and there are many overlaps.
Common ragas include Alhaiya Bilawal, Yaman, Bhairav, Sarang, Shree, Hameer, Gaud Malhar, and Miya Ki Malhar.
The tambura, tanpura, tamburi is a long-necked plucked lute found in different forms in Indian music culture.
Hindustani musicians speak of tanpura whereas Carnatic musicians say tambura ; tamburi is a smaller instrument used for accompanying instrumental soloists.
For practical use, all these types are called tanpura in the text.
One or more tanpuras may be used to accompany vocalists or instrumentalists.
Concerning its history, a quote from A. D. Ranade : The first unambiguous reference to the tanpura is in Sangit Parijat.
It is neither mentioned by the earlier texts nor does it find a place in sculptures.
The male instrument has an open string length of approximately one metre ; the female is three-fourths of the male.
The standard tuning is 5-8-8-1 or, in Indian sargam, PA-sa-sa-SA.
Some ragas require a less common tuning with shuddh NI, NI-sa-sa-SA.
With a five-string instrument, the seventh or NI can be added : PA-NI-sa-sa-SA or MA-NI-sa-sa-SA.
The name tanapura is probably derived from tana, referring to a musical phrase, and pura, which means full or complete.
Both in its musical function and how it works, the tanpura is unique in many ways.
Jiva refers to soul, that which gives life, implying that the tanpura embodies an animated tone quality.
Another linguistic reference is sawari which means saddle.
When the string is plucked, it has a large amplitude, moving up and down and contacting the bridge on the down-phase.
Depending on scale and pitch, this can take between three and ten seconds.
Every single string produces its own cascading range of harmonics and, at the same time, builds up a particular resonance.
Tanpuras are designed in three different styles :.
Mallikarjun Bheemarayappa Mansur was an Indian classical singer of the khyal style in the Jaipur-Atrauli gharana of Hindustani classical music.
Early life and background.
Mansur was born on December 31, 1910, at Mansur, a village five km.
west of Dharwad, Karnataka.
His father, Bheemaraayappa was village headman, a farmer by occupation was an ardent lover and patron of music.
He had four brothers and three sisters.
His elder brother Baswaraj owned a theatre troupe, thus at age nine Mansur did a small role acted in play.
Spotting the talent in his son, Mallikarjuns father engaged him to a travelling Yakshagana troupe.
Sometime later, he was introduced to classical Hindustani music under Nilkanth Bua Alurmath of Miraj who belonged to the Gwalior Gharana.
Following Manji Khans untimely death, he came under the tutelage of Ustad Bhurji Khan, the younger son of Ustad Alladiya Khan.
This grooming under the Khan Brothers had the most important influence on his singing.
He also remained music director with His Masters Voice and later music advisor to All India Radio s Dharwad station.
Mallikarjun Mansur was married to Gangamma.
He had seven daughters and a son Rajashekhar Mansur.
Amongst Pt Mansurs children, Rajashekhar Mansur and Neela Kodli are vocalists.
Rajashekhar Mansur was awarded the Sangeet Natak Akademi award in 2012.
His ancestral home in Mansur was also converted into a memorial.
