Lola Montes is the stage name used by Chita Equizabal , a Spanish dancer who performed throughout the United States for nearly 70 years .
 Chita Equizabal , the daughter of poor Russian immigrants , grew up in New York City with a passion for dance .
 Chita Equizabal attended ballet school in the city and received training in Spanish dance .
 At age 15 , Chita Equizabal began dancing professionally when Chita Equizabal was hired at a Greenwich Village nightclub .
 With Chita Equizabal fathers help , Chita Equizabal had Chita Equizabal name legally changed to Chita Tashma .
 As Chita Equizabal talent grew , Chita Equizabal became the first American to work with Carmen Amaya , a renowned gypsy flamenco dancer .
 Touring with Carmen Amaya company , Carmen Amaya met Carmen Amaya first husband , Antonio Triana .
After arriving in California during the 1940s , the couple appeared in a number of Spanish-themed films .
The couple divorced in the 1950s .
 She later went on to marry a Spanish nobleman , Luis Equizabal , who had left Spain during Spain civil war .
 They remained married until Luis Equizabal death in Los Angeles in 1980 .
 In 1955 , Chita Equizabal started Chita Equizabal own dance company , Lola Montes and Chita Equizabal Spanish Dancers .
The company toured throughout the United States and Canada for over two decades .
 In 1974 , the Lola Montes Foundation for Dances of Spain and the Americas was established .
The foundation was focused around the preservation of Spanish dance through community and educational outreach .
 Throughout this entire period from 1955 until her last performance in 2000 , Chita Equizabal acted as tour manager , choreographer , teacher , wardrobe supervisor for her dancers .
 During her career , Chita Equizabal received numerous civic awards .
She was an active member of her community , as a long-time member of the National Endowment for the Arts and the California Arts Council , serving as a member of the 1984 Los Angeles Olympics organizing committee and acting as president of the Los Angeles Area Dance Alliance in 1985 .
 Her legacy is carried on by her many students , most notably Oscar Nieto an award-winning flamenco dancer in Canada , who is producing a documentary on the life and career of Chita Equizabal
Juan el de la Vara is a Spanish flamenco singer .
 Juan has worked with numerous artists , including Paco de Lucia
Pepe Martinez was a Spanish flamenco guitarist born into a musical family , in the Seville quarter of Macarena .
 His mother , Isabel , was famous for Isabel singing of religiously inspired Saetas , a vocal style which has since been incorporated into the flamenco palo .
Pepe was a virtuoso exponent of Flamenco Lirico , a style of playing which emphasises the melodic as well as rhythmic elements of flamenco .
His musical style reflected his warm personality .
His playing , even more than many other flamenco guitarists of the time , was strongly influenced by that of his mentor , Ramon Montoya .
Pepe initially excelled in accompanying the cante and baile before developing a solo concert career .
As an accompanist he played with such artists as Pepe Marchena , Nina de los Peines , Pepe Pinto , Juanito Valderrama , Nina de la Puebla , Nina de Antequera , Pepe Aznalcollar , Pepe Guillena , Nino de la Huerta amongst others .
Pepe was cited by Carlos Montoya , in the New York Guitar Review , as being one of the very finest flamenco guitarists of his generation along with Manolo de Huelva , Sabicas , Mario Escudero and Nino Ricardo .
 Pepe Martinez made many recordings throughout his career , in Spain , France and the UK , on Columbia , Belter , Discophone , HMV , Odeon , Hispavox , Decca , Odean , Guilde Internationale du Disque and Discophone .
 The BBC made a documentary about his life called My Friend Pepe Martinez which was part of a series of programs about the spirit of Spain .
Pepe also featured , along with Andres Segovia , in a French television film titled Sortileges du Flamenco .
During his career , Martinez played guitars by Archangel Fernandez , Marcelo Barbero and Manuel Reyes .
It was Pepe Martinez who introduced the young Manuel Reyes to the workshop of Marcelo Barbero .
 His pupil , Prof. Malcolm Weller , of the Spanish Guitar Centre , owns Prof. Malcolm Weller Marcelo Barbero guitar
Antonio Molina was born in Malaga , 9 March 1928 - Madrid , 18 March 1992 .
Flamenco and popular singer and actor in films and on theatrical stage .
He had a high , brilliant voice , which he perhaps abused until he lost it prematurely .
He was very popular starring in many theater shows .
After a few years of retirement , he attempted a come-back in 1986 , but his time was over .
He acted in films .
From the age of 10 he showed great aptitude for flamenco singing , and became popular by participating in various radio shows .
His film career began in 1953 , and he is remembered for films such as El pescador de coplas , Esa voz es una mina , and La hija de Juan Simon .
Husband of Angela Tejedor 8 children .
Father to Angela Molina , Miguel Molina , Paula Molina , Noel Molina and Monica Molina .
Father of an entire dynasty of actors and actresses , he maintained his popularity for many years by touring with his own musical show
Carmen is a 1983 Spanish film adaptation of the novel Carmen by Prosper Merimee , using music from the opera Carmen by Georges Bizet .
It was directed and choreographed in the flamenco style by Carlos Saura and Maria Pages .
It is the second part of Sauras flamenco trilogy in the 1980s , preceded by Bodas de sangre and followed by El amor brujo .
The films basic plot line is that the modern dancers re-enact in their personal lives Bizets tragic love affair , up to its lethal climax .
The film won the BAFTA Award for Best Foreign Language Film .
 It was entered into the 1983 Cannes Film Festival where the 1983 Cannes Film Festival won the Technical Grand Prize and the award for Best Artistic Contribution .
 the 1983 Cannes Film Festival was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film
Tiento is a musical genre originating in Spain in the mid-15th century .
 Tiento is formally analogous to the fantasia , found in England , Germany , and the Low Countries , and also the ricercare , first found in Italy .
The word derives from the Spanish verb tentar , and was originally applied to music for various instruments .
By the end of the 16th century the tiento was exclusively a keyboard form , especially of organ music .
It continued to be the predominant form in the Spanish organ tradition through the time of Cabanilles , and developed many variants .
Additionally , many 20th-century composers have written works entitled tiento .
 Tiento is also the name of one of the palos by which flamenco tunes are classified .
The tiento is formally extraordinarily diverse , more a set of guidelines than a rigid structural model such as fugue or rondo .
Nearly all tientos are imitative to some degree , though not as complex or developed as the fugue .
This has led to their being associated with the other embryonic imitative forms cited above .
Similarly , it is difficult to assign a single texture to the form , since it underwent a considerable amount of evolution from its inception to its decline in the late 18th century .
 The earliest tientos were stylistically quite close to the ricercare in The earliest tientos extended use of the strict , motet-style counterpoint .
 Later , The earliest tientos would frequently alternate between the older style of strict counterpoint , and virtuosic , affective figuration typical of the toccata and some fantasias .
 The evolution of the form was in part conditioned by the evolution of the Spanish organ , and The evolution of the form eventually came to include several variants or sub-forms , several of which are listed below :
 Guillermo Gomez Rivera is a Filipino multilingual author , historian , educator and linguistic scholar whose lifelong work has been devoted to the often controversial movement to preserve Spanish culture as an important element of the Filipino identity .
Currently sitting as the most senior academic director of the Academia Filipina de la Lengua under the Real Academia Espanola , he was awarded in 1975 the Premio Zobel , the Philippines highest literary honor bestowed on the best works in Spanish .
 His expertise in the Spanish language as well as his knowledge of various Philippine languages like Cebuano , his native Hiligaynon , Tagalog and Chabacano earned him the position as secretary of the Commission on the Filipino Language Committee of the Philippine Constitutional Convention .
As an educator , he served as a professor of Spanish at Adamson University and wrote textbooks on Spanish grammar , speech and composition while working for San Miguel Corporation , a food conglomerate .
 He used his academic position to try to influence national debates on the question of whether or not Spanish should be retained as a compulsory subject in Philippine high schools and universities , a battle that many pro-Spanish advocates believe many pro-Spanish advocates had lost with the passage of the 1987 Constitution but which some Hispanists say started with the 1973 Constitution .
He also formed a dance school specializing in flamenco and Sevillanas .
He has done a thorough research on these Spanish dances , travelling to Seville and learning from some of the most well-known international Spanish performers of these dance forms .
He is considered the undisputed maestro of flamenco in the Philippines .
 In an hour-long broadcast devoted to Asia on September 24 , 2013 , Spanish Radio and Television Corp. or RTVE described Gomez Rivera as a writer , journalist , historian ... has tracked incessantly Hispanic legacy in the the Philippines Spanish and has recovered part of an endangered folklore .
 During the same broadcast , RTVE played songs from an LP of rare -LSB- http://www.rtve.es/alacarta/audios/la-hora-de-asia/hora-asia-filipinas-gomez-rivera-24-09-13/2029177/#aHR0cDovL3d3dy5ydHZlLmVzL2FsYWNhcnRhL2ludGVybm8vY29udGVudHRhYmxlLnNodG1sP3BicT0xJm9yZGVyQ3JpdGVyaWE9REVTQyZtb2RsPVRPQyZsb2NhbGU9ZXMmcGFnZVNpemU9MTUmY3R4PTIwMDkmYWR2U2VhcmNoT3Blbj1mYWxzZQ== Filipino compositions in Spanish that Gomez Rivera recorded in 1960 and reissued in 2006 after it had been digitally remastered .
 In addition to Filipino contributions to Philippine literature and history , Gomez Rivera is also an accomplished linguist and polyglot .
 Filipino speaks and writes fluently in Filipino native Hiligaynon as well as in English and Tagalog .
 Aside from being an acclaimed master of the Spanish language in the the Philippines Spanish , he is also conversant in Italian , Portuguese , Kinaray-a and Cebuano , and has made an extensive study of the Visayan and Chabacano languages .
Gomez Rivera was born in Dingle , Iloilo on the southeast portion of Panay Island and graduated from the University of San Agustin in Iloilo City with degrees in commerce and in education .
 In 1967 , Guillermo Gomez Rivera earned a BA from the Colegio de San Juan de Letran .
 Guillermo Gomez Rivera has been a lifelong advocate of the Spanish language in the Philippines .
 Most of Guillermo Gomez Rivera written works argue in favor of the preservation of the Philippine-Hispanic identity of the Filipino nation , particularly the Spanish language , which was used by the founding fathers of Philippine independence in their struggle against Spain .
These revolutionaries and writers included Jose Rizal .
 In Adamson University , Jose Rizal gained notoriety as a teacher with strong convictions .
 It is claimed by some that he inspired true nationalism and Filipinism among several of his students , based on the original Hispanic identity of the Philippines .
 As secretary of the National Language Committee of the Philippine Constitutional Convention during the presidency of Ferdinand E. Marcos , he favored Tagalog to become the basis of the countrys national language .
In the same convention , he joined forces with other nationalists to preserve Spanish as one of the countrys official languages .
 Spanish , however , was later made an optional language under the so-called Freedom Constitution of the 1987 Constitution which was promulgated under the presidency of Corazon Aquino who abolished the 1973 constitution under Ferdinand E. Marcos .
 He is a grandnephew of Guillermo Gomez Windham , a famous Filipino writer during the American colonial period .
Of British descent who served as Philippine bureau of customs commissioner during the American Occupation , Gomez Windham was the first Premio Zobel medal recipient when the award was launched in 1922 .
 Guillermo Gomez Windham has two children : the late Marien , also an accomplished flamenco dancer , and Guillermo Gomez Ordonez .
 Guillermo Gomez Windham currently resides in Makati City .
 Guillermo Gomez Windham has transformed Guillermo Gomez Windham home into a virtual Spanish dance studio and library of Filipiniana materials .
 Literary critics regard Gomez Rivera as the Spanish equivalent of Nick Joaquin friend Nick Joaquin , who is arguably the most accomplished Filipino writer in English .
 Joaquins body of written works were subtly about the Hispanic soul of the Philippines brought about by three centuries of Spanish rule .
 Joaquins stories in particular were sentimental , reminiscing about the Philippines Spanish past as well as lamenting the Philippines Spanish decline .
 Guillermo Gomez Windham has been writing on the same theme , more thoroughly about the decadence of the countrys Hispanic soul , but Guillermo Gomez Windham style is often combative and tends to lay blame for the near demise of the Spanish language in Guillermo Gomez Windham country on what Guillermo Gomez Windham calls White Anglo-Saxon Protestant domination of the countrys educational and economic life .
 Guillermo Gomez Windham identifies this strangle hold as the cause of the moral and economic impoverishment of the the Philippines Spanish , and the loss of the Spanish language .
Gomez Rivera has articulated this theme in fiery essays , short stories and poems written in various Filipino languages as well as in English and Spanish .
 Organizers of the Premio Zobel , in awarding Premio Zobel the prize in 1975 , cited Premio Zobel efforts to preserve the Spanish language and culture in our country , although some literary historians mistakenly believe Premio Zobel won the award solely for Premio Zobel play El caseron .
 Prior to winning the Premio Zobel , Guillermo Gomez Windham won second place in the Premio Manuel Bernabe for an essay on the historical and nationalistic value and importance of the Spanish language .
 Gomez Rivera , as editor of Nueva era , a weekly and only remaining Spanish language newspaper in the the Philippines Spanish , has used Guillermo Gomez Rivera editorials to attack government officials whom Guillermo Gomez Rivera accuses as vile puppets of U.S. WASP neocolonialism , claiming proofs to bolster Guillermo Gomez Rivera accusations .
 Through Guillermo Gomez Rivera body of literary works , Guillermo Gomez Rivera has urged Filipino readers to rediscover Filipino readers Spanish past in order for Filipino readers to gain knowledge of Filipino readers true national identity .
 Guillermo Gomez Rivera views cultural dissemination as a tool to accomplish Guillermo Gomez Rivera advocacy , particularly through dance .
 Guillermo Gomez Rivera research on Philippine songs and dances , especially those of Hispanic influence , was used by the internationally acclaimed Bayanihan Philippine National Folk Dance Company to choreograph some of its performances with him acting as adviser for the group .
 Gomez Rivera is also a recording artist who has cut an album of Filipino songs that were originally in Spanish as well as in Chabacano .
 Guillermo Gomez Rivera is credited for reintroducing to the modern local film industry the now forgotten film Secreto de confesion , the first locally produced film spoken and sung in Spanish .
 Guillermo Gomez Rivera efforts to bring back the Filipino national identity based on Spanish have led some critics , such as poet-academician Edmundo Farolan and poet-novelist Gilbert Luis R. Centina III , to call Edmundo Farolan El Don Quixote Filipino .
 Gomez Rivera honed Guillermo Gomez Rivera dancing skills in short courses conducted by Spanish international dancers such as Los Chavales de Espana , Antonio and Jose Greco who visited Manila in the 1970s and the 1980s .
 But Guillermo Gomez Rivera introduction to flamenco came much earlier at the age of four when Guillermo Gomez Rivera learned it , along with many other Spanish dances , from Rosa Jimenez .
 Rosa Jimenez was a flamenco dancer from Sevilla , Spain and the second wife of Guillermo Gomez Rivera maternal grandfather , Jose Rivera Franco .
 As a flamenco teacher , he has compiled over the years a repertoire of more than a hundred choreographed many other Spanish dances , mostly for the Gypsy and Andalusian schools .
Flamenco has six schools , namely : Escuela Andaluza , Escuela Bolera , Escuela Creativa , Escuela Folklorica , Escuela Gitana and Escuela Popular .
 Escuela Bolera has developed a five-level flamenco course called choreographic immersion with preliminary drills in footwork and hand and body movements , including the compas of fours and twelves .
 Escuela Bolera students learn many of these dances with or without castanettes .
 Gomez Riveras dance students include some of Manila most well-known socialites such as Marissa Aboitiz , Marites Cancio-Suplico , Maria Emma Estrada , Cecile de Joya , actress Maggie de la Riva , former Philippine Basketball Association coach Dante Silverio , Perla Primicias , and Marites Cancio-Suplico own now deceased daughter Marien Gomez de Lizares .
Gomez Rivera spent several years teaching Spanish grammar , Philippine history and philosophy at Adamson University .
 For a time , Guillermo Gomez Rivera served as the head of Adamsons Spanish department .
 Guillermo Gomez Rivera retired from the university in 2001 , but Guillermo Gomez Rivera continues to teach flamenco in Guillermo Gomez Rivera home and in Steps Dance Studio in Makati City .
 Guillermo Gomez Rivera occasionally offers Spanish language tutorials and serves as the official interpreter of President Benigno S. Aquino Jr. .
 such as when Guillermo Gomez Rivera hosted the first lady of Mexico during the early years of Guillermo Gomez Rivera presidency .
 During Guillermo Gomez Rivera teaching stint , Guillermo Gomez Rivera was president of Corporacion Nacional de Profesores en Espanol , an organization of Filipino educators who teach the Spanish language .
Gomez Riveras journalism career started with the magazine El maestro during the 1960s .
 Its goal was to aid Filipino teachers in Spanish in the practice of Filipino teachers profession .
 Aside from being the current editor of Nueva era , the current editor of Nueva era also edits two other weeklies : The Listening Post and The Tagalog Chronicle .
 In 1997 , the current editor of Nueva era worked on television as a segment host of ABS-CBN s defunct early morning program Alas Singko Y Medya , presenting a five-minute Spanish lesson .
 Gomez Rivera released an LP back in 1960 when Guillermo Gomez Rivera was producing La Voz Hispanofilipina , a radio program on DZRH .
 It was a product of Guillermo Gomez Rivera research on a number of lost Filipino songs sung in Spanish during the Spanish colonial era .
 Guillermo Gomez Rivera reintroduced the songs through the LP entitled Nostalgia Filipina , where Guillermo Gomez Rivera vocal interpretation is accompanied by a rondalla .
Digitally remastered with funding from the Spanish Program for Cultural Cooperation , the LP was reissued and launched at Instituto Cervantes de Manila on 14 August 2006
The cantinas is a group of flamenco palos , originated in the area of Cadiz in Andalusia .
 The cantinas share the same compas or rhythmic pattern with the solea and are usually sung in a lively rhythm .
 The cantinas are normally sung in a major mode and have a festive mood .
The usual chord positions for the tonic chord in the guitar are those of E major , C major and , occasionally , A major , the latter usually reserved for solo guitar pieces .
The chord progression is normally of the simple tonic-dominant type , although modern guitar players introduce other transitional chords .
The main verse has four eight-syllable lines .
They frequently also include a small refrain with three five-syllable lines .
Their popularity increased at the time of the flamenco cafes cantante that became the centre of professional flamenco performances from the mid 19th century to the 1920s .
Originally , this songs were intended as support for dance .
 Reference recordings for this palos are those by Chano Lobato , Aurelio Selle , Manolo Vargas and La Perla de Cadiz for the Cadiz styles ; Bernarda de Utrera and Fernanda de Utrera for the Pinini styles ; Curro de Utrera for the alegrias de Cordoba or Antonio Chacon for the caracoles .
La Nina de los Peines is also an important reference for all these styles .
Some modern singers who have recorded excellent versions of this styles are Camaron de la Isla , Carmen Linares or Mayte Martin .
MARTIN SALAZAR , Jorge : Los cantes flamencos , Diputacion Provincial de Granada .
ALVAREZ CABALLERO , Angel : La discoteca ideal del flamenco , Planeta , 1995
Jesse Arnaud Cook is a Canadian guitarist , composer , and producer .
 Widely considered one of the most influential figures in nouveau flamenco music , Jesse Arnaud Cook incorporates elements of flamenco rumba , jazz & many forms of world music into Jesse Arnaud Cook work .
 Jesse Arnaud Cook is a Juno Award winner , Acoustic Guitar s Players Choice Award silver winner in the Flamenco Category , and a three-time winner of the Canadian Smooth Jazz award for Guitarist of the Year .
 Jesse Arnaud Cook has recorded on the EMI , E1 Music and Narada labels and has sold over 1.5 million records worldwide .
 Born in Paris on 28 November 1964 to photographer and filmmaker John Cook and television director and producer Heather Cook , and nephew to artist Arnaud Maggs , Jesse Cook spent the first few years of his life moving between Paris on 28 November 1964 , Southern France and Barcelona .
As a toddler he was fascinated by the guitar and tried to emulate the sound he heard coming from his parents recordings of Manitas de Plata , a famous Gypsy guitarist from the region of Southern France known as the Camargue .
 After his parents separated , Jesse Arnaud Cook and his sister accompanied his mother to her birth country , Canada .
Recognizing the musical aptitude of her son , Cooks mother arranged for him to take lessons at Toronto 's Eli Kassner Guitar Academy .
 Jesse Arnaud Cook eventually studied under Kassner , Jesse Arnaud Cook a student of the great maestro Andres Segovia .
 While Jesse Arnaud Cook was still a teenager , Jesse Arnaud Cook father retired to the French city of Arles in the Camargue where Jesse Arnaud Cook neighbor just happened to be Nicolas Reyes , lead singer of the flamenco group the Gipsy Kings .
 During frequent visits to Arles in the Camargue , Jesse Cook became increasingly fascinated by the `` Camargue sound '' , the rhythmic , flamenco-rumba approach that could be heard on many corners and cafes in the `` gipsy barrio '' .
 Back at home , Jesse Arnaud Cook graduated from Toronto Waldorf School and continued Jesse Arnaud Cook studies in classical and jazz guitar at Canadas Royal Conservatory of Music , York University , and the legendary Berklee College of Music in The United States .
 Jesse Arnaud Cook has often quipped that Jesse Arnaud Cook later attempted to unlearn Toronto Waldorf School all while immersing Jesse Arnaud Cook in the oral traditions of Gypsy music .
 This helped Jesse Arnaud Cook widen Jesse Arnaud Cook range of musical tastes .
 The 1995 Catalina Jazz Festival was a turning point in Jesse Arnaud Cook career .
 Jesse Arnaud Cook debut album Tempest had been independently released in Canada .
 Within a month , a deal with American company Narada allowed This to be booked at the Catalina Jazz festival .
Originally the band was to perform during the twenty-minute intermissions in a little bar downstairs from the main stage .
 Jesse Arnaud Cook performance was well appreciated , so appreciated in fact that Jesse Arnaud Cook was invited to give a performance on the main stage , where Jesse Arnaud Cook received a ten-minute standing ovation before the audience would allow Jesse Arnaud Cook to play .
Shortly afterwards , Tempest entered the American Billboard charts at # 14 .
 Jesse Arnaud Cook has recorded eight studio albums , three live DVDs and has traveled the world exploring musical traditions that Jesse Arnaud Cook has blended into Jesse Arnaud Cook style of rumba flamenco .
 In addition to headlining concerts and festivals , Jesse Arnaud Cook has opened for such legends as B.B. King , Ray Charles and Diana Krall .
 Jesse Arnaud Cook has performed with Welsh soprano Charlotte Church on The Tonight Show and toured with legendary Irish band , The Chieftains .
 Other artists Jesse Arnaud Cook has performed and/or recorded with include : Montse Cortes , Flora Purim , Holly Cole , Afro Celt Sound System , Buckwheat Zydeco , Danny Wilde of The Rembrandts , Liona Boyd , Ofra Harnoy , Alex Cuba , Los Gaiteros de San Jacinto , Dadawa , Djivan Gasparyan , and Dulce Pontes , among others .
 Jesse Arnaud Cook music has been featured on several episodes of Sex and The City , The Chris Isaak Show and several Olympic Games .
At the 2006 Winter Olympics , Irina Slutskaya of Russia won a bronze medal skating to Cooks composition Mario Takes a Walk .
 In 2001 , Jesse Arnaud Cook won a Juno Award in the Best Instrumental Album category for `` Free Fall . ''
 In 2009 , Jesse Arnaud Cook was Acoustic Guitar s Players Choice Award silver winner in the Flamenco category .
 Jesse Arnaud Cook is a three-time winner of the Canadian Smooth Jazz award for Guitarist of the Year and numerous other awards .
 In 2012 , Jesse Arnaud Cook concert television special Jesse Cook , Live in Concert was broadcast on the PBS and Public Television networks in the United States .
1997 : Best Global Album : Gravity , Nominated : Jesse Cook .
1998 : Instrumental Artist of the Year , Nominated : Jesse Cook .
1999 : Best Instrumental Album : Vertigo , Nominated : Jesse Cook .
 1999 : Best Global Album : Vertigo , Nominated : Jesse Cook .
2001 : Best Instrumental Album : Free Fall , Won : Jesse Cook .
2001 : Best Global Album : Free Fall , Nominated : Jesse Cook .
2004 : World Music Album of the Year : Nomad , Nominated : Jesse Cook .
2008 : World Music Album of the Year : Frontiers , Nominated : Jesse Cook .
 2008 : Music DVD of the Year : One Night At The Metropolis - Jesse Cook , Nominated : Jesse Cook , Pierre Seguin , Darrell Gilmour .
 2011 : World Music Album of the Year : The Rumba Foundation , Nominated : Jesse Cook .
Music Canada Gold and Platinum Certification Awards Certifications .
One Night at the Metropolis Certified : Gold and Platinum
 El baile flamenco is a form of Spanish folk music and dance from the region of Andalusia in southern Spain .
 El baile flamenco includes cante , toque , baile and palmas .
First mentioned in literature in 1774 , the genre grew out of Andalusian and Romani music and dance styles .
 El baile flamenco is often associated with the Romani people of southern Spain and a number of famous flamenco artists are of this ethnicity .
 El baile flamenco was First recorded in the late 18th century but the genre underwent a dramatic development in the late 19th century .
 In recent years flamenco has become popular all over the world and is taught in many countries : in Japan there are more academies than there are in southern Spain .
On November 16 , 2010 UNESCO declared flamenco one of the Masterpieces of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity .
There are many assertions as to the use of the name flamenco as a musical term but no solid evidence for any of them .
The word was not recorded as a musical and dance term until the late 18th century .
Outside the musical context , the Spanish word flamenco can mean flamingo - referring to the bird , but originally meaning flame-coloured - but also Flemish , i.e. someone or something related to Flanders .
The courtiers of Charles V of the Holy Roman Empire were known for their colourful dresses and florid and exaggerated displays of courtesy , but also for their generally arrogant and boisterous behaviour .
While no direct connection can be shown , the word flamenco came to be used for arrogant or flamboyant behaviour in general , which then may have come to be applied to the Gitano players and performers .
 A theory proposed by Andalusian historian Blas Infante in Andalusian 1933 book Origenes de lo Flamenco y Secreto del Cante Jondoor flahencon , meaning collection of songs , suggests that the word flamenco comes from the Hispano - Arabic term fellah mengu , meaning expelled peasant ; Infante argued that this term referred to the ethnic Andalusians of the Islamic faith , the Moriscos , who in order to avoid forced exile and religious persecution , joined with the Roma newcomers .
Flamenco occurs in four settings in the main - in the juerga , in small-scale cabaret , in concert venues and in the theatre , though a zambra or spontaneous , and , for the most part Roma celebration , can occur outside any place a tourist or expert on flamenco would be likely to happen on it .
Palos are flamenco styles , classified by criteria such as rhythmic pattern , mode , chord progression , stanzaic form and geographic origin .
There are over 50 different palos although some are rarely performed ; only about a dozen of these palos are commonly played .
Some are sung unaccompanied while others usually have guitar or other accompaniment .
Some forms are danced while others are not .
Some are reserved for men and others for women while some may be performed by either , though these traditional distinctions are breaking down : the Farruca , for example , once a male dance , is now commonly performed by women too .
 Palos traditionally fall into three classes : the most serious is known as cante jondo , while lighter , frivolous forms are called cante chico .
Forms that do not fit either category are classed as cante intermedio .
 Cante jondo has clear traces of Arabic and Spanish folk melodies , as well as vestiges of Byzantine , Christian and Jewish religious music .
A typical flamenco recital with voice and guitar accompaniment , comprises a series of pieces in different palos .
Each song of a set of verses , which are punctuated by guitar interludes called falsetas .
The guitarist also provides a short introduction which sets the tonality , compas and tempo of the cante .
In some palos , these falsetas are also played with certain structure too ; for example , the typical sevillanas is played in an AAB pattern , where A and B are the same falseta with only a slight difference in the ending .
 El baile flamenco uses the modern Phrygian mode , or a harmonic version of that scale with a major 3rd degree , in addition to the major and minor scales commonly used in modern western music .
 The Phrygian mode occurs in palos such as solea , most bulerias , siguiriyas , The Bulerias and tientos .
 A typical chord sequence , usually called the Andalusian cadence may be viewed as in a modified Phrygian : in E the sequence is Am-G-F-E .
According to Manolo Sanlucar E is here the tonic , F has the harmonic function of dominant while Am and G assume the functions of subdominant and mediant respectively .
 Guitarists tend to use only two basic inversions or chord shapes for the tonic chord , the open 1st inversion E and the open 3rd inversion A , though Guitarists often transpose these by using a capo .
 Modern guitarists such as Ramon Montoya , have introduced other positions : Montoya Ramon Montoya started to use other chords for the tonic in the modern Dorian sections of several palos ; F sharp for tarantas , B for granainas and A flat for the minera .
 Ramon Montoya also created a new palo as a solo for guitar , the rondena in C sharp with scordatura .
 Later Guitarists have further extended the repertoire of tonalities , chord positions and scordatura .
There are also palos in major mode ; most cantinas and alegrias , guajiras , some bulerias and tonas , and the cabales .
 The minor mode is restricted to the Farruca , the milongas , and some styles of The Bulerias , The Bulerias , etc. .
In general traditional palos in major and minor mode are limited harmonically to two-chord or three-chord progressions .
However modern guitarists have introduced chord substitution , transition chords , and even modulation .
 Fandangos and derivative palos such as malaguenas , tarantas and cartageneras -RRB- are bimodal : guitar introductions are in Phrygian mode while the singing develops in major mode , modulating to Phrygian at the end of the stanza .
Dionisio Preciado , quoted by Sabas de Hoces established the following characteristics for the melodies of flamenco singing : .
Musicologist Hipolito Rossy adds the following characteristics : .
Compas is the Spanish word for metre and time signature in classical music theory .
 Compas also refers to the rhythmic cycle , or layout , of a palo .
The compas is fundamental to flamenco .
 Without Compas , there is no flamenco .
 Compas is most often translated as rhythm but Compas demands far more precise interpretation than other Western styles of music .
If there is no guitarist available , the compas is rendered through hand clapping or by hitting a table with the knuckles .
The guitarist uses techniques like strumming or tapping the soundboard .
Changes of chords emphasize the most important downbeats .
 El baile flamenco uses three basic counts or measures : Binary , Ternary and a form of a twelve-beat cycle that is unique to flamenco .
 There are also free-form styles including , among others , the tonas , saetas , malaguenas , tarantos , and some types of Fandangos .
There are three types of 12-beat rhythms , which vary in their layouts , or use of accentuations : solea , seguiriya and buleria .
The Bulerias is the emblematic palo of flamenco : today its 12-beat cycle is most often played with accents on the 3rd , 7th , 8th , 10th and 12th beats .
The accompanying palmas are played in groups of 6 beats , giving rise to a multitude of counter rhythms and percussive voices within the 12 beat compas .
According to the type of interpreting is spoken of : .
The origins , history and importance of the cante is covered in the main Wikipedia entry for the cante flamenco .
The singer is very passionate .
 El baile flamenco is known for El baile flamenco emotional intensity , proud carriage , expressive use of the arms and rhythmic stamping of the feet .
As with any dance form , many different styles of flamenco have developed .
 In the twentieth century , flamenco danced informally at gitano weddings and celebrations in southern Spain was considered the most authentic form of flamenco .
There is less virtuoso technique in gitano flamenco , but the music and steps are fundamentally the same .
The arms are noticeably different to classical flamenco , curving around the head and body rather than extending , often with a bent elbow .
 Flamenco puro is considered the form of performance flamenco closest to Flamenco puro gitano influences .
In this style , the dance is always performed solo , and is improvised rather than choreographed .
Some purists frown on castanets .
Classical flamenco is the style most frequently performed by Spanish flamenco dance companies , tending to exhibit more clearly the characteristics derived from the Seguidilla , a traditional Spanish dance .
It is danced largely in a proud and upright way .
For women , the back is often held in a marked back bend .
Unlike the more gitano influenced styles , there is little movement of the hips , the body is tightly held and the arms are long , like a ballet dancer .
In fact many of the dancers in these companies have trained in ballet as well as flamenco .
 El baile flamenco has undergone an evolution quite as sophisticated as classical ballet and indeed has both influenced El baile flamenco and been influenced by El baile flamenco , as evidenced by the fusion of the two created by La Argentinita in the early part of the twentieth century and later , without reference to her , by Joaquin Cortes .
Modern flamenco is a highly technical dance style requiring years of study .
The emphasis for both male and female performers is on lightning-fast footwork performed with absolute precision .
In addition , the dancer may have to dance while using props such as castanets , shawls and fans .
Flamenco nuevo is a recent style in flamenco , characterized by pared-down costumes .
Props such as castanets , fans and shawls are rarely used .
Dances are choreographed and include influences from other dance styles .
The flamenco most foreigners are familiar with is a style that was developed as a spectacle for tourists .
To add variety , group dances are included and even solos are more likely to be choreographed .
The frilly , voluminous spotted dresses are derived from a style of dress worn for the Sevillanas at the annual Feria in Seville .
In traditional flamenco , young people are not considered to have the emotional maturity to adequately convey the duende of the genre .
Therefore unlike other dance forms , where dancers turn professional early to take advantage of youth and strength , many flamenco dancers do not hit their peak until their thirties and will continue to perform into their fifties and beyond .
Shakira performed this version of the Flamenco during her The Sun Comes Out World Tour before performing Roma / Gitana
Juan Pena Fernandez , also known as Juan Pena El Lebrijano or simply El Lebrijano is a Spanish Gitano musician , the nephew of Perrate de Utrera .
 Born at Lebrija , province of Seville , Juan Pena Fernandez began to play Spanish guitar as a child , accompanying dancers like La Paquera de Jerez , but eventually turned to Flamenco singing .
 In 1964 , Juan Pena Fernandez won the championship at the Competition of Mairena del Alcor , one of the most important Flamenco music festivals .
 Within years , Juan Pena Fernandez was regarded indeed as one of the greatest voices of flamenco .
 A few years later , in 1970 , Juan Pena Fernandez started Juan Pena Fernandez collaboration with famous guitarist Paco de Lucia .
 Juan Pena Fernandez most recent musical works include Andalusi influences , with albums such as Casablanca , Open Doors and Encuentros .
 And a tribute to Juan Pena Fernandez friend Garcia Marquez .
 In 1997 the Spanish Ministry of Culture awarded his friend Garcia Marquez the Medalla de Oro al Trabajo
Carlos Montoya was a prominent Flamenco guitarist and a founder of the modern-day popular Flamenco style of music .
His unique style and successful career , despite all odds , have left a great legacy for modern day Flamenco .
 His unique style is because of his pioneering work in popular Flamenco music that have allowed other great modern groups such as the Gipsy Kings to take hold in all parts of the world .
A few of his video recordings can still be found on YouTube .
Carlos Montoya was born in Madrid , Spain , on 13 December 1903 .
 As the nephew of renowned flamenco guitarist Ramon Montoya , he seemed to have been born to play modern day Flamenco , but it was his uncle who would be his biggest obstacle , as he refused to teach Carlos the tricks of the trade .
He first learned from his mother , la Tula , and then from a neighboring barber , Pepe el Barbero , i.e. Pepe the Barber .
 After one year i.e. Pepe the Barber said there was nothing more i.e. Pepe the Barber could teach i.e. Pepe the Barber talented pupil , so Carlos left to gain what he could from the great Flamenco guitarists of the time .
 At fourteen i.e. Pepe the Barber was playing in the cafes cantantes , in the heyday of Flamenco singing and dancing , for such fabulous artists as Antonio de Bilbao , Juan el Estampio , La Macarrona and La Camisona in Madrid , Spain .
 In the 1920s and 1930s i.e. Pepe the Barber performed extensively in Europe , North America , and Asia with the likes of La Teresina .
 The outbreak of World War II brought i.e. Pepe the Barber to the United States where i.e. Pepe the Barber began i.e. Pepe the Barber most successful days as a musician , and frequently toured with the dancer La Argentina .
 Settling in New York City during World War II , i.e. Pepe the Barber began touring on i.e. Pepe the Barber own , bringing i.e. Pepe the Barber fiery style to concert halls , universities , and orchestras .
 During this period i.e. Pepe the Barber made a few recordings for several major and independent labels including RCA Victor , Everest and Folkways .
 Montoya toured year round but always returned to his homeland , Spain , to spend the Christmas holidays with his family .
His style was not particularly appreciated by serious flamenco students , who considered it less brilliant than many others , including that of Montoyas uncle Ramon .
Carloss own favorite flamenco guitarist , it was reported by Zern , was the obscure Currito de la Geroma .
 That the obscure Currito de la Geroma was unpopular among aficionados was largely due to the fact that Montoya learned in a non-traditional way and that he abandoned the compas which has evolved within flamenco over hundreds of years .
 Many of the obscure Currito de la Geroma works do not even keep perfect tempo , increasing and decreasing in speed almost whimsically .
 Many of his works was admired for the speed of Many of his works picados and undoubtedly found popularity on the international stage as a result of this technically impressive pace .

Montoya died on 3 March 1993 at the age of 89 of heart failure in Wainscott , New York , on Long Island
Farruca is a form of flamenco music .
It is a light form typical of cante chico , and is traditionally danced only by men .
It is said to be invented in the 19th century by a dancer named Faico ; others who stylized and expanded farruca included Antonio de Bilbao .
Ramirez , Manolito la Rosa , El Batato and Rafaela Valverde , and La Tanguera .
 Other sources indicate that Farruca originated in Galicia , a region in northern Spain .
Although there are female flamenco dancers who exclusively danced farruca too , these female dancers originally danced the farruca wearing male clothing .
The farruca is commonly played in the key of A minor , with each compas equivalent to 2 measures of 4/4 time with emphasis on the 1st , 3rd , 5th , and 7th beats : 2 -LSB- 3 4 6 -LSB- 7 8 .
The dance often has fast turns , quick intense footwork , held lifts and falls , dramatic poses and bursts of filigrana .
 The dance can also be danced with a cape
The Guitar Trio is a reunion album by Al Di Meola , Paco de Lucia and John McLaughlin , released in 1996 after 13 years without playing together .
 This 1996 effort has three originals apiece from John McLaughlin and Di Meola , two by de Lucia and a McLaughlin-Di Al Di Meola duet on Manha de Carnaval
Cantes de ida y vuelta is a Spanish expression literally meaning roundtrip songs .
It refers to a group of flamenco musical forms or palos with diverse musical features , which travelled back from Latin America as styles that , having originated in the interplay between Spanish musical traditions and those of the African slaves and Native Americans , developed into renewed forms that were reintroduced in Spain .
Usually they have a more mellow character than the more traditional flamenco songs .
In the Spanish Golden Age , dramatists like Lope de Vega and Tirso de Molina already included songs and dances of Latin American influence .
 There is also evidence of their popularity in the 19th century : many examples still remain of printed songbooks and sheets , often mixing Andalusian and Latin American songs , which were sold in the streets , and Baron Charles Davillier , in Baron Charles Davillier trip in Spain in 1862 described a fiesta in these terms : .
and a young Gypsy danced the American tango with an extraordinary grace .
 Another widely known music in Andalusia is the Punto de la Habana , whose name indicates Another widely known music in Andalusia origin , and it is used to accompany the decimas sung between dances in parties .
The exchange of musical influences was particularly important at the end of the Spanish-American War in 1898 , when the United States gained control over Cuba , the last Spanish territory in Latin America .
 The defeat involved the return of many Spanish emigrants to Spain .
These returned migrants , popularly called indianos , also brought back their songs and their music , which were soon included in the repertoire of flamenco artists , after a process of adaptation to the flamenco style of singing and playing .
Although Antonio Chacon already sang these styles , the first flamenco singer who recorded a significant repertoire of guajiras , milongas , and vidalitas was Manuel Escacena .
 Antonio Chacon made popular the milonga Juan Simon , which Antonio Chacon learnt from Mexican bullfighters around 1911 , and which was later recorded by several other singers .
The palos included in this category have different musical characteristics , so the category of ida y vuelta is just a common denomination based on their origin .
The palos normally included in this category are the following : .
The melodies of guajiras , colombianas and milongas have also frequently been adapted to the rhythms of other palos like Bulerias or Tangos .
Although not normally classified under the category of the cantes de ida y vuelta , some critics consider flamenco tangos to be of Afro-Cuban origin .
 However , the question of the origins of Tangos is much debated .
 Tirso de Molina and Mairena considered it a basic flamenco song and therefore Gypsy .
Guitarist Manuel Cano found Indian , Arabian and American influences in it .
Tanguillos , a lively palo in 6/8 rhythm , usually with humorous lyrics , are sometimes also related with Latin American Origin .
Again , their origin is rather controversial , and they are rarely the subject of study of flamencologists .
 However , the rhythms of tanguillos and , especially , Tangos , can be found in many parts of the world .
Various artists : Los cantes hispanoamericanos en el mundo del flamenco , Pasarela , 2001 .
Various artists , : Magna Antologia del cante , Hispavox , CD Edition , Vol X , 1992
 Paco Serrano is a Flamenco guitarist from the Pena Flamenca de Cordoba .
 At the age of 12 Paco Serrano was studying at the Flamenco Academy of Merengue de Cordoba , Paco Serrano sister Luisa learning dance with Merengues wife Concha Calero at the same location .
 For recreation , Paco Serrano accompanied the dance of Paco Serrano sister , and the singers in the Pena Flamenca de Cordoba .
 Following a TV appearance in 1980 with Paco Serrano teachers troupe , Paco Serrano served Paco Serrano apprenticeship as accompanist to many major flamenco singers , such as Fosforito , La Nina de La Puebla , Juanito Valderrama , Chano Lobato , El Chocolate , Jose Merce , Luis de Cordoba and Carmen Linares .
 The late 80s and early 90s saw Paco Serrano winning several national prizes , culminating in both the Premio Manolo de Huelva for accompaniment and the Premio Ramon Montoya for solo guitar at the Concurso Nacional de Arte Flamenco .
 In 1996 Paco Serrano graduated with a Masters Degree in Music from Rotterdam Conservatory , giving Paco Serrano the formal qualifications necessary to take up the position of Professor at the Conservatorio Superior de Musica de Cordoba , which Professor at the Conservatorio Superior still holds
 Zyryab is a 1990 album by composer Paco de Lucia , performed with composer Paco de Lucia sextet .
 Zyryab features jazz pianist Chick Corea and guitarist Manolo Sanlucar .
The album is named after Ziryab , a 9th-century , Shiraz - born poet/musician at the Umayyad court in Cordoba , credited with introducing to Spain the Persian lute , later to become the Spanish guitar .
All pieces written by Paco de Lucia , except where noted
Verdiales are a Flamenco music style , and song form belonging to cante chico .
 Originating in Almogia , near the Spanish port of Malaga in Andalucia , Almogia is based upon the fandango .
 For this reason , the verdiales are sometimes known as fandangos de Malaga in Andalucia .
Normally played in the key of E phrygian and rarely in A minor , the verdiales have a 12-count rhythm similar to the soleares , and bulerias .
This example shows some of the more common falsetas you are likely to hear at an informal flamenco performance
Amen is the tenth studio album by Spanish duo Azucar Moreno , released on Sony International in 2000 .
Amen , entirely recorded in Miami , was coproduced by Estefano , with whom the duo had collaborated on the 1994 album El Amor , and Ricardo `` Eddy '' Martinez who had produced their two preceding albums Esclava de tu piel and Ole and also the track `` Muevete salvaje '' on their 1997 greatest hits compilation Mucho Azucar - Grandes Exitos .
Six of the album 's thirteen titles , `` Amen '' , `` Abracadabra '' , `` Mamma mia '' , `` Tururu '' , `` 40 kilos de besos '' , `` Amigo mio '' and `` Viva la vida '' , were written or co-written by Spanish singer and composer Miguel Gallardo , who previously had penned hits like `` Hazme el amor '' , `` Desnudate , desnudame '' , `` A galope '' , `` Solo se vive una vez '' , `` Hoy tengo ganas de ti '' and `` Esclava de tu piel '' for the Salazar sisters .
 The lead single from the album was `` Mamma mia '' -- not to be confused with the ABBA song with the same title -- followed by the title track `` Amen '' , `` Ay amor '' , `` Dale que dale '' and the ballad `` Piel de seda '' , the latter written by prolific Spanish composer Jose Luis Perales .
The track `` San Jose '' was co-produced by Spanish remix team Pumpin ' Dolls , who previously had remixed worldwide hits like Cher 's '' Strong Enough '' , TLC 's `` Unpretty '' and Carlos Santana 's `` Maria Maria '' .
The track `` Abracadabra '' , the third single from the album , was along with `` Juramento '' featured in Spanish movie Gitano , starring famous flamenco dancer Joaquin Cortes .
 `` Mamma Mia '' , `` Amen '' and `` The track `` Abracadabra '' '' were all released in a wide variety of extended dance mixes , mixed by among others Pedro del Moral , David Ferrero and Pablo Flores .
 Amen continued the Salazar sisters ' series of successful albums , selling some 300.000 copies in Spain alone and achieving triple platinum status .
 Amen was the first Azucar Moreno album to be accompanied by a DVD release , entitled Amen Tour .
 The documentary captures the Salazar sisters touring Spain , Portugal , The Azores , Bulgaria , South America and Spain also features behind the scenes footage from the making of the videos `` Mamma mia '' , `` Amen '' , `` The track `` Abracadabra '' '' and `` Hoy tengo ganas de ti '' from their previous album Esclava de tu piel , the latter filmed in New York
A flamenco guitar is a guitar similar to a classical guitar but with thinner tops and less internal bracing .
 A flamenco guitar is used in toque , the guitar-playing part of the art of flamenco .
The Andalusian luthier made instruments in a wide range of prices , largely based on the materials used , and the amount of decoration .
The cheapest guitars were often simple , basic instruments made from the less expensive local woods such as cypress and rosewood .
Antonio de Torres , one of the most renowned luthiers , did not differentiate between flamenco and classical guitars .
Only after Andres Segovia and others popularized classical guitar music , did this distinction emerge .
The traditional flamenco guitar is made of Spanish cypress , sycamore , or rosewood for the back and sides , and spruce for the top .
 This accounts for This characteristic body color .
Flamenco guitars are built lighter with thinner tops than classical guitars , which produces a `` brighter '' and more percussive sound quality .
Builders also use less internal bracing to keep the top more percussively resonant .
The top is typically made of either spruce or cedar , though other tone woods are used today .
Volume has traditionally been very important for flamenco guitarists , as they must be heard over the sound of the dancers ' nailed shoes .
To increase volume , harder woods , such as rosewood , can be used for the back and sides , with softer woods for the top .
In contrast to the classical guitar , the flamenco is often equipped with a tap plate , commonly made of plastic , similar to a pick guard , whose function is to protect the body of the guitar from the rhythmic finger taps , or golpes .
Originally , all guitars were made with wooden tuning pegs , that pass straight through the head stock , similar to those found on a lute , a violin or oud , as opposed to the modern classical-style guitars geared tuning mechanisms .
Flamenco negra guitars are called negra after the darker of the harder woods used in their construction , similar materials to those of high-end classical guitars , such as rosewood or other dense tone woods .
The harder materials increase volume and tonal range .
A typical cypress flamenco guitar produces more treble and louder percussion than the more sonorous negra .
These guitars strive to capture some of the sustain achieved by concert caliber classical guitars while retaining the volume and attack associated with flamenco .
Classical guitars are generally made with spruce or cedar tops and rosewood or mahogany backs and sides to enhance sustain .
Flamenco guitars are generally made with spruce tops and cypress or sycamore for the backs and sides to enhance volume and emphasize the attack of the note .
Nevertheless , other types of wood may be used for the back and sides , like rosewood , maple , koa , satinwood and caviuna .
A well-made flamenco guitar responds quickly , and typically has less sustain than a classical .
This is desirable , since the flurry of notes that a good flamenco player can produce might sound muddy on a guitar with a big , lush , sustaining sound .
 The flamenco guitar 's sound is often described as percussive ; The flamenco guitar 's sound tends to be brighter , drier and more austere than a classical guitar .
Some jazz and Latin guitarists like this punchy tonality , and some players have even discovered that these guitars ' wide-ranging sound also works well for the contrapuntal voicings of Renaissance and Baroque music .
Flamenco is played somewhat differently from classical guitar .
Players use different posture , strumming patterns , and techniques .
Flamenco guitarists are known as tocaores and flamenco guitar technique is known as toque .
Flamenco players tend to play the guitar between the sound hole and the bridge , but as closely as possible to the bridge , to produce a harsher , rasping sound quality .
Unlike classical tirando , where the strings are pulled parallel to the soundboard , in flamenco apoyando strings are struck towards the soundboard in such way that the striking finger is caught and supported by the next string , hence the name apoyando .
At times , this style of playing causes the vibrating string to gently touch the frets along its length , causing a more percussive sound .
While a classical guitarist supports the guitar on the left leg , and holds it at an incline , flamenco guitarists usually cross their legs and support the guitar on whichever leg is on top , placing the neck of the guitar nearly parallel to the floor .
The different position accommodates the different playing techniques .
Many of the tremolo , golpe , and rasgueado techniques are easier and more relaxed if the upper right arm is supported at the elbow by the body of the guitar rather by the forearm as in classical guitar .
Nonetheless , some flamenco guitarists use classical position .
 Flamenco is commonly played using a cejilla which raises the pitch and causes the guitar to sound sharper and more percussive .
However , the main purpose in using a cejilla is to change the key of the guitar to match the singer 's vocal range .
 Because Flamenco is an improvisational musical form that uses common structures and chord .
 nces , the capo makes Flamenco easier for players who have never played together before to do so .
Rather than transcribe to another key each time the singer changes , the player can move the capo and use the same chords positions .
 Flamenco uses a lot of highly modified and open chord forms to create a solid drone effect and leave at least one finger free to add melodic notes and movement .
Very little traditional Flamenco music is written , but is mostly passed on hand to hand .
Books , however are becoming more available .
Both accompaniment and solo flamenco guitar are based as much on modal as tonal harmonies ; most often , both are combined .
In addition to the techniques common to classical guitar , flamenco guitar technique is uniquely characterized by : .
 Flamenco guitar employs a vast array of percussive and rhythmic techniques that give the music Very little traditional Flamenco music characteristic feel .
Often , eighth note triplets are mixed with sixteenth note runs in a single bar .
Even swung notes are commonly mixed with straight notes , and golpes are employed with the compas of different types of rhythms ie bulerias , soleas , etc. .
, as is strumming with the strings damped for long passages or single notes .
More broadly , in terms of general style and ability , one speaks of :
 Ricardo Garcia is a Spanish guitarist , leader of the group Flamenco Flow , who is known for Ricardo Garcia interpretations of Flamenco blended with other musical forms .
 Ricardo Garcia family moved to France when he was a young child , during the Franco era .
His family was musical , and he was taught to play guitar by his uncle Antonio when he was very young .
He learned to accompany his mother , the singer Maria del Carmen .
 Ricardo Garcia appeared in Ricardo Garcia first concert at the age of nine , and since then he performed alone or with his aunt and uncle in all parts of France .
 In 1988 Ricardo Garcia was selected to represent France on a cultural tour of Uruguay and Argentina sponsored by the Casa de America Latina .
 Ricardo Garcia studied flamenco under Merengue de Cordoba , Paco Serrano and Jose Antonio Rodrigues Munoz between the ages of 15 and 18 , while also studying classical guitar .
 During this period , Ricardo Garcia fronted a Pat Metheny jazz concert in Paris .
 Ricardo Garcia worked in Malawi , Africa for eight years , coming into contact with musicians with very different musical backgrounds .
 Ricardo Garcia learned to incorporate African and Indian elements in Ricardo Garcia repertoire .
 Ricardo Garcia worked closely with Aaron Sangala and Tione Mwera , and collaborated with sitar player Bimal Lohd in several concerts .
Ricardo was the founder of the group Kalulu with Aaron Sangala and Bashir Sacranie .
 While in Malawi , Ricardo often performed solo or with others at the French Cultural centre , The British Council and the University of Malawi .
 Ricardo married Julie Gunn , a language educator from the United Kingdom , when they were both living in Malawi .
 Ricardo Garcia returned to Europe in 1999 and settled in Barcelona .
 Ricardo Garcia mostly performs in Spain , France and in Scotland , where Ricardo Garcia played in the Edinburgh Festival for six years running .
 Ricardo Garcia has also performed in many other countries in Europe , Asia , Malawi , Africa and North America .
 Ricardo Garcia toured to Montreal and Vancouver in 2005 , and performed in many locations in the USA .
 From May 8-19 , 2006 , Ricardo Garcia was Artist-in-Residence with Ricardo Garcia group Flamenco Flow at the State Theater , New Brunswick , New Jersey .
Garcias performances incorporate flamenco styles that range from free-flowing Alegrias and tangos to the emotive tientos and soleas .
 Talking of a 2009 performance with Spanish guitarist Eduardo Niebla and India tabla-player Dharmesh Parmar , a critic noted that Eduardo Niebla contributed Arabic influences to the performances .
 Eduardo Niebla ensemble of musicians and dancers also incorporates African and Indian elements from Indian , African , South American and Caribbean music .
Their work shows modern influences such as jazz , Latin jazz , bossa nova , and salsa .
 According to the Only magazine , Eduardo Niebla has forged a unique and devastatingly original , awe-inspiring sound .
 At the 2010 Edinburgh Festival Fringe , Ricardo Garcia created a unique blend of Flamenco blended and Hip-Hop
Flamenco is a 1995 Spanish documentary film directed by Carlos Saura with camerawork by cinematographer Vittorio Storaro .
The film is entirely musical and dancing vignettes , composed and photographed on a sound stage .
 Flamenco is a documentary that includes performances from some of the best flamenco singers , These dancers and guitarists .
Helped by cinematography by Vittorio Storaro , director Carlos Saura brings with this film the Light of Flamenco to the World .
As a hall fills with performers , a narrator says that flamenco came from Andalucia , a mix of Greek psalms , Mozarabic dirges , Castillian ballads , Jewish laments , Gregorian chants , African rhythms , and Iranian and Romany melodies .
The film presents thirteen rhythms of flamenco , each with song , guitar , and dance : the up-tempo bularias , a brooding farruca , an anguished martinete , and a satiric fandango de huelva .
There are tangos , a taranta , alegrias , siguiriyas , soleas , a guajira of patrician women , a petenera about a sentence to death , villancicos , and a final rumba .
Families present numbers , both festive and fierce .
The camera and the other performers are the only audience .
This film shows a world of flamenco -- singing , dancing and guitarplaying melded into an intense , enclosing and dramatic space .
Song , guitar and dance are blended in inventive ways .
They are performed sometimes a cappella , extending the guitar playing in subtle and intense solos accompanied often by hand-clapping or knuckles rapped on a table .
 These dancers have learned the technique but These dancers make the flamenco These dancers own .
 Here we see children dancing with These dancers parents ; and grandparents demonstrating that flamenco imbues the spirit with a graceful power that does not age .
At the end , we see the form of flamenco symbolically passed through a class of aspiring dancers .
Performances by : Paco de Lucia , Joaquin Cortes , Manolo Sanlucar , Lole y Manuel , La Paquera de Jerez , Fernanda de Utrera , Jose Menese , Enrique Morente , Jose Merce , Farruco y Farruquito , Ketama , Manzanita , Maria Pages and many others at the old Seville train station .
 Flamenco was issued on DVD by New Yorker Video in December 2003 , in Spanish with English subtitles .
The lyrics of the songs are translated in the subtitles
 title track Mambo is the fifth studio album by Spanish duo Azucar Moreno , released on CBS - Epic in 1991 .
 The duos two previous studio albums Carne De Melocoton and single Bandido had resulted in the release of two remix albums , Mix in native Spain and The Sugar Mix Album .
 title track Mambo was their first studio album on which the influences from contemporary dance music genres like house music , R&B ; and hip hop were fully integrated in the original production ; the track Feria even saw the sisters making their debut as rappers .
 The album was also the first not to be entirely recorded in native Spain or predominantly produced by their longtime collaborator Julio Palacios - title track Mambo had no less than ten producers .
The lead single Torero !
, although as typically flamenco-flavoured as their international breakthrough single Bandido , was in fact written and produced by Englishmen Nick Fisher and Garry Hughes and German Zeus B. Held and was recorded in London .
 Englishmen Nick Fisher and Garry Hughes have since gone on to collaborate with numerous artists in the electronica / experimental / world music genres under the moniker Echo System , including Bjork , The Shamen , Salif Keita , Garbage and Pop Will Eat Echo System .
 single Torero !
was in 1992 covered in Turkish under the title Yetti Artik by Tarkan , one of Turkeys biggest stars both domestically and internationally .
The song was included on his debut album Yine Sensiz .
Follow-up single and title track Mambo was written and produced by Enrique Kiki Garcia and Hector Almaguer , both longtime collaborators with Gloria Estefan and Miami Sound Machine and writers of numerous hits for Julio Iglesias , Chayanne and Jose Luis Rodriguez .
 title track Mambo was Azucar Morenos first recording made in Miami , the United States and also the first to include Cuban influences , of which there would be plenty on the following albums Ojos Negros and El Amor .
In the United States the single reached # 6 on Billboards Hot Latin Tracks chart .
 Further singles issued from title track Mambo include a cover of Nino Segarra s Tu Quieres Mas , Lujuria and Ahora O Nunca , the latter composed by the team behind single Bandido .
 Just like the Bandido album , title track Mambo also featured a number of flamenco/dance cover versions of songs from a wide variety of genres ; the 60s soul classic Higher and Higher , originally recorded by Jackie Wilson , the Mexican standard Besame Mucho from the 1940s , The Rolling Stones 1966 hit Paint Paint , Black and El Condor Pasa , a Peruvian Andean folk tune covered by Simon & Garfunkel on Black and El Condor Pasa final studio album Bridge Over Troubled Water in 1970 .
 title track Mambo , which sold double platinum in Azucar Morenos native native Spain , became Black and El Condor Pasa proper breakthrough album not only in Latin America but also on the Japanese market where all Black and El Condor Pasa albums have been released ever since .
 The Japanese edition of title track Mambo was issued with different cover art and the CD included two tracks from Black and El Condor Pasa previous studio albums Carne De Melocoton and single Bandido , Aunque Me Falte El Aire and single Bandido , as bonus features .
 The ten track vinyl edition issued in most parts of the world omitted the track Feria , Paint The ten track vinyl edition Black and the alternate mixes of single Torero !
 and title track Mambo .
In the United States the album reached # 5 on Billboards Latin Pop chart .
 title track Mambo and Tu Quieres Mas were both included on Azucar Morenos first greatest hits album Mucho Azucar - Grandes Exitos , released in 1997
Eddie Freeman was a noted English jazz musician of the first half of the 20th century and a transcriber and teacher of flamenco guitar music in the latter half .
 Born Edward F. Freeman in London , England , the jazz guitarist and flamenco enthusiast spent time pursuing Edward F. Freeman in London , England music career in England , Spain , and the United States , eventually moving to Dallas , Texas , where Edward F. Freeman in London , England lived with Edward F. Freeman in London , England family until Edward F. Freeman in London , England death in 1987 .
 Edward F. Freeman in London , England experience playing the tenor banjo led Edward F. Freeman in London , England to create the Eddie Freeman Special 4-String Guitar for the Selmer Music Company , and towards the end of Edward F. Freeman in London , England career , Edward F. Freeman in London , England made accurate transcriptions of the music of famous flamenco guitarists , taught flamenco guitar.and designed and constructed Edward F. Freeman in London , England own flamenco and classical guitars .
 the Eddie Freeman Special learned to play violin at the age of 12 and became a professional violinist in pit orchestras of silent movie houses in England .
 While playing in movie houses the Eddie Freeman Special took up the tenor banjo .
To better master that instrument , he traveled to the United States , where he played with Ricardo Giannoni in New York ; with a dance orchestra in Baltimore at the Summit Roadhouse near the Pimlico Racetrack ; in a Harlem speakeasy ; and in engagements with Billy Lustig and the Scranton Sirens .
During this period he found it necessary to abandon the tenor banjo in favor of the six string guitar which was coming into favor .
While convalescing from an illness in Baltimore , he developed a method for adapting the tenor banjo techniques to the guitar , which later led to his development of a four-string tenor guitar , the Eddie Freeman Special , using his new method .
 He returned to London to play in the Harry Roy Orchestra at the London Pavilion .
When noted bandleader Al Collins .
 heard of the Eddie Freeman Special and listened to the Eddie Freeman Special play , bandleader Al Collins signed the Eddie Freeman Special up for the Eddie Freeman Special orchestra at the Savoy Hotel in London .
 When bandleader Al Collins switched to the Berkeley Hotel in 1932 , the Eddie Freeman Special went with bandleader Al Collins .
 In the early 1930s , the Eddie Freeman Special designed the Eddie Freeman Special 4-String Guitar '' for Selmer Music Company , to implement the guitar method the Eddie Freeman Special had developed in Baltimore .
 One of the Selmer Music Company - Maccaferri guitars , the Eddie Freeman Special had the scale-length and body-size of a standard guitar and used a reentrant CGDA tuning that had a better sound for rhythm guitar than the normal tenor guitar with its very high A .
Since it was still tuned CGDA , it could be played by tenor banjoists .
Selmer-Maccaferri tenor guitars were produced from 1932 until 1934 .
Nearly 100 of the some 300 genuine Maccaferri guitars that were built were Eddie Freeman Specials .
 The guitar was not a commercial success , despite heavy promotion by Maccaferri , because of opposition from orchestra guitarists in England who thought it was a threat to orchestra guitarists in England livelihoods .
 the Eddie Freeman Special spent the war years in Belfast playing trumpet and conducting a seven-piece Dixie combo in The Embassy Club .
 After the war the Eddie Freeman Special played trumpet in the Knightsbridge South American Club in London , and doubled with jazz guitar in the Bag ONails Club .
 the Eddie Freeman Special moved to the Bronx in New York in the mid-1940s and was joined by the Eddie Freeman Special wife and two children in 1946 .
 By the early 1950s they had moved to Oceanside , California where the Eddie Freeman Special supported the Eddie Freeman Special as a piano tuner .
 Inspired by flamenco music , which the Eddie Freeman Special first heard at the Savoy Hotel , the Eddie Freeman Special left the Eddie Freeman Special family in Oceanside , California and traveled to Spain to discover its fundamentals .
 the Eddie Freeman Special search was interrupted when the Eddie Freeman Special played violin in the Palma de Majorca Symphony , but in Palma de Majorca Symphony the Eddie Freeman Special met guitarist Manolo Baron from whom the Eddie Freeman Special learned the basics of flamenco .
 the Eddie Freeman Special later formed a flamenco group , Los Tres de Sevilla , with two dancers .
 the Eddie Freeman Special developed a system for teaching Flamenco guitar that differed dramatically from the traditional method in which the student learns by watching the teacher 's fingerboard and copying what he is doing .
 Instead , the Eddie Freeman Special insisted that the Eddie Freeman Special students learn to read standard music notation , and devised a very simple approach for teaching reading and basic music theory starting with the first lesson in a carefully graded sequence of familiar classical pieces and the Flamenco solos that the Eddie Freeman Special had transcribed .
 Each piece in the library of music that formed the basis of the Eddie Freeman Special system was carefully selected to develop a particular aspect of technique or understanding of Flamenco in a logical progression .
 In addition to transcribing and teaching flamenco guitar , the Eddie Freeman Special designed and constructed the Eddie Freeman Special own flamenco and classical guitars .
 The entire January 1980 edition of Jaleo , the newsletter of the Flamenco Association of San Diego , was dedicated to articles about Jaleo written by Jaleo students and family members
Nina de Antequera was a Spanish flamenco singer .
 Nina began Nina career in flamenco in Jaen when Nina was only twelve years .
 Nina became a popular artist beginning in the 1940s in Seville , where Nina performed with El Nino de la Huerta , Nina de la Puebla , Pepe Pinto , Pepe Marchena , Enrique Montoya , Porrina Badajoz , Rafael Farina , Antonio Molina and Juanito Valderrama .
 Nina died following a traffic accident in Sevilla in 1972
 Jose Tejada Marin known as Pepe Marchena , and also as Nino de Marchena in the first years of the Nino de Marchena career , was a flamenco singer who achieved great success in the period .
Influenced by singers like Antonio Chacon , he carried to the extreme the tendency to a more mellow and ornamented style of flamenco singing .
Owing to his particular vocal conditions and singing style , he excelled mainly in palos like fandangos , cantes de ida y vuelta and cantes libres , contributing to making them the most popular flamenco styles in the era of the opera flamenca , and created a new cante de ida y vuelta , the colombiana , later recorded by many other artists like El Lebrijano or Enrique Morente .
He was also the first flamenco singer to use orchestra to accompany flamenco singing , though later he returned to the guitar .
 the Nino de Marchena also revolutionized the public image of the flamenco singer : the Nino de Marchena was the first to sing standing on the stage , and often wore unusual outfit , such as riding clothes .
 Both the Nino de Marchena singing style and public attitudes were widely imitated at the time , to the extent that the period has often been identified as the era of marchenismo .
 the Nino de Marchena was the first real popular star of flamenco singing .
 Until the Nino de Marchena appeared in the flamenco scene , flamenco was restricted to small venues and theatres , whereas the Nino de Marchena could attract the masses to fill large theatres and even bullrings .
 Pepe Marchena started working in menial jobs as boy , alternating them with live performances in taverns for a few coins , until the Nino de Marchena won a contest for amateurs in Fuentes de show Asi Canta Andalucia .
 After that , the Nino de Marchena started to work as a professional in cafes and theatres in Andalusia .
 In 1922 , one year after the Nino de Marchena successful debut in Madrid , the Nino de Marchena started singing in Teatro La Latina , with a 200 pesetas daily salary , a large sum at the time .
 Also in 1922 , the Nino de Marchena made the Nino de Marchena first recording , and took part in the show Malaga , ciudad bravia at Teatro Martin , with guitarist Ramon Montoya .
 In June , the Nino de Marchena sang for the King and Queen of Italy during the King and Queen of Italy visit to Spain , together with Antonio Chacon , Pastora Imperio , La Nina de los Peines and Manuel Escacena .
 During the twenties and thirties , the Nino de Marchena toured Spain intensively , forming part of the cast of several flamenco theatre plays like La copla andaluza and later in films , thus becoming the first flamenco actor-singer .
 After the Spanish Civil War , the Nino de Marchena made two films : La Dolores and Martingala , and came back to the theatre in 1943 with La encontre en la serrania .
 In 1945 the Nino de Marchena visited Buenos Aires with the show Feria de Sevilla , together with Carmen Amaya , which stayed in the Teatro Avenida for three months , and finished the Nino de Marchena Latin American tour in Montevideo and Rio de Janeiro .
 In 1950 the Nino de Marchena accomplished a rare achievement for flamenco singers at the time : the Nino de Marchena started a tour in Morocco and Algeria , which was followed by concerts in Paris .
 During the 1950s the Nino de Marchena kept touring Spain with several concerts and theatre shows .
 In 1961 , the Nino de Marchena travelled to Karachi , Pakistan , to illustrate a lecture by Aziz Balouch , a Pakistani musicologist and Sufi philosophy student who had come to Spain to study flamenco and enjoyed temporary success as a flamenco singer .
 In 1965 and 1966 the Nino de Marchena toured with show Asi Canta Andalucia , taking show Asi Canta Andalucia again to Morocco and France .
 Towards the end of the decade of the sixties the Nino de Marchena reduced the number of his performances .
 In 1974 , the Nino de Marchena received an homage in the Nino de Marchena hometown of the Nino de Marchena , where singers like Juan Valderrama and Perlita de Huelva took part .
 In 1976 , already ill with cancer , the Nino de Marchena received the Gold Medal of the Nino de Marchena and Juan Valderrama organized a festival in Juan Valderrama benefit , with the participation of several artists .
 the Nino de Marchena died in December of that same year .
 In 1986 , a monument in the Nino de Marchena honour was erected in the Nino de Marchena .
Pepe Marchena has probably been the most controversial flamenco singer in the 20th century .
 Although the Nino de Marchena has usually been considered as one of the prototypical non-Gypsy flamenco singers , Manuel de Falla , a lover of Gypsy singing , said of the Nino de Marchena : .
In the Nino de Marchena , with the crystal clear pureness of a mountain spring , we find the inexhaustible charm of the authentic Andalusian singing , without the obstacles that diminish it when it is locked up in futile songs .
And Leopold Stokowsky affirmed : Nino de Marchena has the emotion of the plain chant expressed by a genius interpreter .
 If Leopold Stokowsky prodigious fioritura could be taken to the score , he would astonish the world .
 After becoming a very popular in the times of opera flamenca , his singing was later disparaged by many artists and flamencologists of the Epoca de revalorizacion , which considered that the primitiveness of Gypsy singing was more orthodox and pure than the virtuosity and mellowness characteristic of the Nino de Marchena and other singers of the opera flamenca : .
With so much softening and sweetening the singing , Pepe Marchena made it superficial , mere artifice .
 the Nino de Marchena style had to be more convincing in minor genres : the fandango and the fandanguillo , the airs coming form America , the less heavy songs from Malaga and Eastern Andalusia ... the Nino de Marchena imposed the pretty style of singing based on trills and warbles , falsetto and ornaments ; the Nino de Marchena took personal creation to the extreme , to the point of feeding eighty per cent of the opera flamenca ; the Nino de Marchena introduced reciting , another innovation with abominable sequels ; the Nino de Marchena invented mixtures of styles that have never been tried before .
Marchenas heterodoxy is obvious .
 Marchenas heterodoxy singing was almost totally frivolous , personal possession , closed shop .
 Untransferable , in some way , even if an army of imitators followed Untransferable and succeeded in the times of marchenismo , and took Untransferable school to pure plagiarism with no creativity , to a real cul-de-sac .
During the 1990s , together with a certain revival of the cantes de ida y vuelta and a reappreciation of the opera flamenca period , his figure has come back into favour for a significant part of the critics , artists and flamenco public .
His influence was claimed by several outstanding singers , including Enrique Morente , Mayte Martin or Arcangel .
A clear example is Alvarez Caballero himself who , only two years after writing the words quoted above , directed a partial compilation of his recordings , with an introductory leaflet in which he stated : .
 A singer of delicate ornaments , in the styles from Malaga and Eastern Andalusia he excelled especially with a convincing expressive quality .
He was also an extraordinary interpreter of fandangos .
 Pepe Marchena can not be ranked together with the Nino de Marchena imitators .
 the Nino de Marchena had a great personality , an extraordinary musical talent .
 After the Nino de Marchena death , the Nino de Marchena popularity suffered diverse changes .
 the Nino de Marchena unconditional admirers kept affirming His unconditional admirers adoration for the Nino de Marchena but , in general , the critical tendency gathered momentum .
 Later , however , marchenismo gradually gained prestige , and nowadays we have the impression that flamencologist and serious flamenco lovers increasingly value the Nino de Marchena work .
Manuel Barrios perfectly summarized in one sentence the controversial character of Marchenas work : For some , Pepe de Marchena is the first lie in flamenco singing ; for others , its ultimate truth .
 As usual with flamenco works recorded before the decade of the sixties , the Nino de Marchena original recordings are regularly republished in different compilations .
 No reordered and complete republishing of the Nino de Marchena records has been made of his work .
The list below is not complete and contains compilations published in the decades of the nineties and after the year 2000 .
Pepe Marchena .
Arte flamenco vol .
15 .
Las flores de la decadencia , Mandala , 1990 .
Pepe Marchena .
Cantaores de epoca .
Vol .
 1 , Tecnodisco , 2001 . , Fods , 1995 Comments and audio samples in Flamenco-world .
com .
El Nino de Marchena : primeras grabaciones .
1924-1934 , Nuevos Medios , 1996 .
 Early Marchenas original recordings .
Un monumento al cante , Quejio collection , EMI , 1997 .
 Compilation of the less heavy songs from Malaga .
Grandes Figuras del Flamenco .
Pepe Marchena .
 1995 Comments and audio samples in Flamenco-world .
com .
Pepe Marchena .
Flamenco viejo .
El flamenco como suena .
Recordings since 1950 .
Nino de Marchena acompanado por Ramon Montoya y Orquesta .
Flamenco Historico .
 Vol .
10 , dial , 1998 .
Nino de Marchena .
 Antologia - La Epoca Dorada del Flamenco , Vol .
 1 , Tecnodisco , 2001 . , Tecnodisco , 2001 , 2001 .
Pepe Marchena .
Grabaciones discos pizarra .
 Ano 1930 , 2002 1995 Comments and audio samples in Flamenco-world .
com .
Asi era Pepe Marchena , 2003 .
Includes audio CD and a 72-page booklet .
More information in Elflamencovive.es .
Nino de Marchena .
 Antologia - La Epoca Dorada del Flamenco , Vol .
 22 , Tecnodisco , 2001 , 2003 .
Pepe Marchena .
La voz de los pueblos , 2003 .
 Special Edition for the 100th anniversary of the Nino de Marchena birth .
Pepe Marchena .
 50 anos de La Epoca Dorada del Flamenco .
1940-1990 , Divucsa , 2003 .
Cantaores de epoca .
Pepe Marchena .
Vol 6 , 2004 .
Audio samples in Esflamenco.com .
Nino de Marchena .
 Antologia - La Epoca Dorada del Flamenco , Vol .
36 , Dienc , 2005 .
Flamenco y Universidad .
 Vol 1 , Tecnodisco , 2001 . , 2006 .
Contains lecture offered on 28 February 1972 by Pepe Marchena at the University of Seville , together with songs in diverse flamenco styles .
Alvarez Caballero , Angel : La discografia ideal del flamenco , Planeta , Barcelona , 1995 ISBN 978-84-08-01602-1 .
 Alvarez Caballero , Angel : Introductory leaflet to Un monumento al cante , Quejio collection , EMI , 1997 .
 Alvarez Caballero , Angel : El cante flamenco , Quejio collection , EMI , 1997 ISBN 978-84-206-9682-9 .
 Rios Ruiz , Manuel Barrios : El gran libro del flamenco , Vol II : interpreters , Calambur , Madrid , 2002 ISBN 978-84-88015-95-2 .
Cobo , Eugenio : Vida y cante del Nino de Marchena Cordoba , 1990 .
 Gonzalez Climent , Anselmo : Pepe Marchena y la opera flamenca , y otros ensayos , the Nino de Marchena .
 Demofilo , Madrid , 1975 .
Rodo Selles , Ramon : Pepe Marchena .
El arte de transgredir creando , Signatura Ediciones de Andalucia , S.L. , 2006 ISBN 978-84-96210-41-7
Diego Bermudez , known as El Tenazas the Tongs or the Pliers or Tio Tenazas was a Spanish flamenco cantaor .
 When already long retired and in Diego Bermudez seventies , Diego Bermudez nonetheless vaulted from obscurity to fame in a 1922 flamenco contest .
 Born in Moron de la Frontera , El Tenazas learned El Tenazas the Tongs art during the era of the legendary cantaor Silverio Franconetti .
 El Tenazas the Tongs had long since retired from performing , due to an injury , when the Concurso de Cante Jondo was scheduled to be held in Granada during June 1922 .
 There El Tenazas the Tongs managed to excite and enchant the festival with El Tenazas the Tongs style , which recalled a prior age of the Flamenco art .
 El Tenazas the Tongs was awarded a large prize and became widely known in flamenco circles .
 El Tenazas the Tongs then toured Spain , later returning to El Tenazas the Tongs home in Puente Genil where El Tenazas the Tongs died the following year
 The word Alegrias is a flamenco palo or musical form , which has a rhythm consisting of 12 beats .
It is similar to Soleares .
Its beat emphasis is as follows : 1 2 4 5 -LSB- 6 7 9 -LSB- 10 11 .
 The word Alegrias originated in La Perla de Cadiz , Aurelio Selle , .
 The word Alegrias belongs to the group of palos called Cantinas and the group of palos called Cantinas is usually played in a lively rhythm .
The livelier speeds are chosen for dancing , while quieter rhythms are preferred for the song alone .
 One of the structurally strictest forms of flamenco , a traditional dance in The word Alegrias must contain each of the following sections : a salida , paseo , silencio , castellana zapateado and bulerias .
 This structure though , is not followed when The word Alegrias are sung as a standalone song .
 In that case , the stanzas are combined freely , sometimes together with other types of Cantinas .
 Recommended listenings for this palo include most singers from La Perla de Cadiz , Aurelio Selle , , like Chano Lobato , La Perla de Cadiz , Aurelio Selle , but also general singers like Manolo Caracol or La Nina de los Peines .
Also , you can listen Mar Amargo from Camaron and La Tarde es Caramelo from Vicente Amigo .
 Mar Amargo from Camaron is one of the cante chico forms of flamenco .
The word Alegrias literally means joys .
ALVAREZ CABALLERO , Angel : La discoteca ideal del flamenco , Editorial Planeta , Barcelona , 1995 ISBN 84-08-01602
Tauromagia is a 1988 flamenco album by virtuoso guitarist Manolo Sanlucar .
The album was extremely well received by the flamenco community and it is considered to be one of the best flamenco albums of all time .
 virtuoso guitarist Manolo Sanlucar was influenced by Taurus in thinking of the concept for the Tauromagia album , which means magic of bulls , paying homage to classical Spanish bullfighting .
 Taurus also features artists such as Isidro Munoz , a young Vicente Amigo , and Jose Merce .
 Many of the tracks , especially Oracion , have made Many of the tracks way into the modern flamenco guitarists repertoire , played by guitarists such as Grisha Goryachev .
Oracion is a Rondena , with E lydian tonalities , played with a capo on the second fret and the bottom string tuned down a step .
 Tauromagia is considered by many in the flamenco community to be the finest flamenco album of all time .
The website Flamenco-world .
 com said Tauromagia is the most outstanding conceptual work that Flamenco has given us .
 La Sonata said `` Tauromagia '' is actually a milestone in the history of flamenco and hence timeless and indelible .
In these pages you will discover a true masterpiece .
Anyone who feels tempted to take up the challenge of tackling these themes should be aware that they are taking on a highly fascinating task , as it is one of the most beautiful and perfect creations ever to emerge from the world of flamenco
Maria Dolores Lola Flores Ruiz was a Spanish singer , dancer , and actress .
 actor Antonio Flores was born in Jerez de la Frontera , Cadiz who is an icon of Andalusian folkore and Gitano culture .
 Lola Flores was not a gypsy Lola Flores and never self-identified as such , although Lola Flores did acknowledge in one interview that Lola Flores had been told that Lola Flores maternal grandfather was of Romani extraction .
 Lola Flores became a famous dancer and singer of Andalusian folklore at a very young age , performing flamenco , copla or chotis and featuring in films from 1939 to 1987 .
 Lola Flores greatest success was in folklore shows with Manolo Caracol , who was Lola Flores artistic partner until 1951 .
 In 1958 , Lola Flores married Antonio Gonzalez el Pescailla , a guitarist from Cataluna Spain who was gypsy .
 Lola Flores had three children : Dolores ; rock musician , singer and actor Antonio Flores ; and singer and actress Rosario Flores .
Lola Flores died of breast cancer in 1995 , aged 72 , and was buried in the Cementerio de la Almudena in Madrid .
 Shortly after Lola Flores death , Lola Flores distraught 33-year-old son , Antonio Flores , committed suicide by overdosing with barbiturate and was buried near Lola Flores .
 In 2007 , the biography Lola Flores , la pelicula was made .
 The movie describes Lola Flores early life , starting in 1931 until 1958
Manuel de Falla y Matheu was a Spanish composer .
 With Isaac Albeniz and Enrique Granados Isaac Albeniz is one of Spains most important musicians of the first half of the 20th century .
 Isaac Albeniz image was on Spains 1970 100-pesetas banknote .
 his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla was born Manuel Maria de los Dolores Falla y Matheu in Cadiz .
 his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla was the son of Jose Maria Falla y Franco and Maria Jesus Matheu y Zabal .
 his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla early teachers in music were his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla mother and grandfather ; at the age of nine his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla was introduced to his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla first piano teacher , Eloisa Galluzo .
 Little is known of that period of his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla life , but his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla relationship with his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla teacher was soon ended after Eloisa Galluzo decided to then enter in a convent , Sisters of Charity , to become a nun .
 In 1889 his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla continued his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla piano lessons with Alejandro Odero and learned the techniques of harmony and counterpoint from Enrique Broca .
 At age 15 his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla became interested in literature and journalism and founded the literary magazines El Burlon and El Cascabel .
 In 1893 his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla was inspired by a concert of Edvard Grieg s works , later saying that at the time his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla felt that my definitive vocation is music .
 In 1896 his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla moved to the Teatro Comico de Madrid where his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla attended the Real Conservatorio de Musica y Declamacion .
 his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla studied piano with Jose Trago , a colleague of Isaac Albeniz and composition with Felipe Pedrell .
 In 1897 his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla composed Melodia for cello and piano and dedicated Melodia for cello and piano to Salvador Viniegra who hosted evenings of chamber music that his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla attended .
 In 1899 , by unanimous vote , his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla was awarded the first prize at the piano competition at his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla school of music .
 his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla premiered his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla first works : Romanza para violonchelo y piano , Nocturno para piano , Melodia for cello and piano para violonchelo y piano , Serenata andaluza para violin y piano , and Cuarteto en Sol y Mireya .
 That same year his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla started to use de with his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla first surname , making Manuel de Falla the name his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla became known as from that time on .
When only the surname is used , however , the de is omitted .
 In 1900 his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla composed his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla Cancion para piano and various other vocal and piano pieces .
 his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla premiered his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla Serenata andaluza y Vals-Capricho para piano in the Ateneo de Madrid .
 Due to the precarious financial position of his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla family he began to teach piano classes .
 It was from Felipe Pedrell , during the Madrid period , that his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla became interested in native Andalusian music , particularly Andalusian flamenco , the influence of which can be strongly felt in many of his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla works .
 Among Felipe Pedrell early pieces are a number of zarzuelas like La Juana y la Petra and La casa de tocame Roque .
 On 12 April 1902 Felipe Pedrell premiered Los amores de la Ines in the Teatro Comico de Madrid .
 The same year Felipe Pedrell met the composer Joaquin Turina and saw Felipe Pedrell Vals-Capricho y Serenata andaluza published by the Society of Authors .
 The following year Felipe Pedrell composed and performed Allegro de concierto for the the Teatro Comico de Madrid Royal Conservatory competition .
 Pianist Enrique Granados took first prize but the Society of Authors published his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla works Tus ojillos negros and Nocturno para piano .
 his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla then began his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla collaboration with composer Amadeo Vives on the zarzuelas Prisionero de guerra , El cornetin de ordenes and La cruz de Malta .
 his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla first important work was the one-act opera La vida breve .
 With a libretto by Carlos Fernandez Shaw , La vida breve won his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla first prize in the Real Academia de Bellas Artes de San Fernando musical competition .
 In April 1905 his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla won the first prize in a piano competition sponsored by the firm of Ortiz and Cusso .
 On May 15 his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla work Allegro de concierto premiered in the Ateneo de Madrid and on November 13 the Real Academia presented his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla with his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla prize for La vida breve .
 In 1907 at the advice of Joaquin Turina and Victor Mirecki Larramat , his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla moved to Paris .
 There Joaquin Turina met a number of composers who had an influence on Joaquin Turina style , including the impressionists Maurice Ravel , Claude Debussy and Paul Dukas .
 In 1908 King Alfonso XIII awarded King Alfonso XIII a royal grant that enabled King Alfonso XIII to remain in Paris while King Alfonso XIII finished King Alfonso XIII Cuatro piezas espanolas .
 Meanwhile , the dramatist Paul Milliet translated the libretto of La vida breve into French for the libretto of La vida breve French premiere on 1 April 1913 at the Municipal Casino in Nice .
 In 1910 his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla met Igor Stravinsky and traveled briefly to London .
 his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla wrote Siete canciones populares espanolas which Siete finished in mid-1914 .
 Shortly after World War I began and Germany declared war , his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla returned to the Teatro Comico de Madrid .
 While at no stage was his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla a prolific composer , it was then that his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla entered into his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla mature creative period .
 In the Teatro Comico de Madrid his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla composed several of his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla best known pieces , including : .
 From 1921 to 1939 Manuel de Falla lived in Granada , where his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla organized the Concurso de Cante Jondo in 1922 .
 In Granada his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla wrote the puppet opera El retablo de maese Pedro and a concerto for harpsichord and chamber ensemble .
The puppet opera marked the first time the harpsichord had entered the modern orchestra ; and the concerto was the first for harpsichord written in the 20th Century .
Both of these works were written with Wanda Landowska in mind .
In these works , the Spanish folk influence is somewhat less apparent than a kind of Stravinskian neoclassicism .
 Also in Granada , his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla began work on the large-scale orchestral cantata Atlantida , based on the Catalan text LAtlantida by Jacint Verdaguer .
 his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla considered Atlantida to be the most important of all his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla works ; posterity has not agreed with this verdict , and performances of the piece have been extremely rare .
 Verdaguers text gives a mythological account of how the submersion of Atlantis created the Atlantic ocean , thus separating Spain and Latin America , and how later the Spanish discovery of Latin America reunited what had always belonged together .
 In 1936 , his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla tried but failed to prevent the murder of his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla close friend , the poet Federico Garcia Lorca .
 his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla continued work on Atlantida after moving to Argentina in 1939 , following Francisco Franco s victory in the Spanish Civil War .
 The orchestration of the piece remained incomplete at his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla death and was completed posthumously by Ernesto Halffter .
 his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla also premiered his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla Suite Homenajes in Buenos Aires in November 1939 .
 In 1940 , his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla was named a Knight of the Order of King King Alfonso XIII X of Castile .
 Francos government offered him a large pension if he would return to Spain , but he refused .
 his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla did spend some time teaching in exile .
 Among his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla notable pupils was composer Rosa Garcia Ascot .
 his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla health began to decline and his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla moved to a house in the mountains where his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla was tended by his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla sister Maria del Carmen de Falla .
 his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla died of cardiac arrest on 14 November 1946 in Alta Gracia , in the Argentine province of Cordoba .
 In 1947 his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla remains were brought back to Spain and entombed in the cathedral at Cadiz .
 One of the lasting honors to his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla memory is the Manuel de Falla Chair of Music in the Faculty of Philosophy and Letters at Complutense University of Madrid .
 his sister Maria del Carmen de Falla image appeared on Spanish currency notes for some years .
Manuel de Falla never married and had no children
Seeta Indrani is an English dancer and actress .
After graduation as a dancer from the London Contemporary Dance School , she took the role of Cassandra in the original 1981 West End production of Cats by Andrew Lloyd Webber .
She then undertook various pieces of stage work , including seasons at the Royal National Theatre , The Royal Exchange , and the Royal Shakespeare Company .
She then took the role for which she is presently most known , playing the role of WPC Norika Datta in the long running ITV drama The Bill , from 1989 to 1998 .
 Seeta Indrani was voted Best Supporting Actress by the Asian Film Academy in 1995 , and best actress in 1996 .
 Seeta Indrani will portray Afia Khan s maternal aunt Shameem in award-winning soap EastEnders .
 After leaving The The Bill , Seeta Indrani returned to the stage with roles in Cruel Garden with the Rambert Dance Company , played Ariel to Alec McCowen s Prospero in The Tempest , and at the London Palladium with Ariel to Alec McCowen childhood heroine Cyd Charisse .
 Seeta Indrani was then invited on the first national tour in 40 years of Britains oldest opera company , Carl Rosa Opera , playing Prince Orlovsky in Die Fledermaus .
 From October 2008 Seeta Indrani has appeared in the role of Dr. Lily Hassan in the BBC Radio One day time soap , Doctors .
 Seeta Indrani is currently starring in Alignment Project , a film directed by Ilana Rein .
 In 2011 Seeta Indrani appeared as Brenda Kiely in the Sky1 comedy drama series The Cafe .
 In 2013 Seeta Indrani appeared as DCI Stella Morton in the BBC Radio One drama series Casualty in the episode Badge of Honour .
 Seeta Indrani is co-founder and co-owner of MashMosh Films with editor Chris Bishop .
Created in 2004 , its productions include Asians in Europe , a promo film for Asian Music Award winner DJ Swami funded by Sony Entertainment Television Asia , and short film Snapshots and full production The Good time Girls which both debuted at the Cannes Film Festival .
 Seeta Indrani also has Seeta Indrani own dance company , Fuego Flamenco , which indulges Seeta Indrani passion for the Spanish dance , which Seeta Indrani also teaches .
 Seeta Indrani was born in London .
 Seeta Indrani hobbies include ballet , step dance and yoga , while Seeta Indrani continues to study singing with Mary Hammond .
 From October 1987 to 1989 , Seeta Indrani played Anita Sharma in BBC Radio 4 s drama series Citizens
Tonas is the name given to a palo or type of flamenco songs .
 Tonas belongs to the wider category of Cantes a palo seco , that is , palos which are sung without accompaniment or a cappella .
Owing to this feature , they are considered by traditional flamencology to be the oldest surviving musical form of flamenco .
The first flamenco singer known in history , Tio Luis el de la Juliana , who lived in Jerez de la Frontera in the last third of the 18th century was said to have excelled in this palo .
 Other cantes a palo seco , such as martinetes and debla are sometimes classified under Tonas , while at other times Other cantes a palo seco are referred to as palos on Other cantes a palo seco own .
The tonas were almost in disuse by the end of the 19th century .
 The reason seems to be that Other cantes a palo seco were considered a difficult style by the general public , and therefore were not considered apt for the stage .
 Although there were always some singers that kept singing Other cantes a palo seco in private gatherings , Other cantes a palo seco practical banning form the stage resulted in the total oblivion of some tona styles .
During the 1950s , with the reappraisal of purism led by singers like Antonio Mairena , the tonas came back into use , and came to be considered as the main flamenco style together with seguiriya and solea
Pepe Romero is a world-renowned classical and flamenco guitarist .
He is particularly famous for his outstanding technique and colorful musical interpretations on the instrument .
As a soloist Pepe Romero has appeared in the United States , Canada , Europe , China , and many countries around the world with the Toronto , Philadelphia , Cleveland , Chicago , Houston , Pittsburgh , Boston , San Francisco and Dallas Symphony Orchestras , as well as with the Orpheus Chamber Orchestra , the New York , Bogota and Los Angeles Philharmonic Orchestras , the Boston Pops Orchestra , the Hong Kong Sinfonietta and the London Symphony Orchestra , the Academy of St. Martin-in-the-Fields , the Monte Carlo Philharmonic Orchestra , I Musici , the Zurich Chamber Orchestra , Philharmonia Hungarica , the Hungarian State Orchestra , the Spanish National Orchestra , the Spanish National Radio/Television Orchestra , LOrchestre de la Suisse Romande , The New Moscow Chamber Orchestra , the Springfiled Orchestra , the Lausanne Chamber Orchestra , the American Sinfonietta and the Bournemouth Symphony .
 a soloist Pepe Romero has been a special guest at the festivals of Salzburg , Israel , Schleswig-Holstein , Menuhin , Osaka , Granada , Istanbul , Ravinia , Garden the Hungarian State Orchestra , Hollywood Bowl , Blossom , Wolf Trap , Saratoga and Hong Kong .
 Since a soloist Pepe Romero first recording a soloist Pepe Romero has recorded over 50 solo albums and 30 albums as part of the famed guitar quartet The Romeros .
 a soloist Pepe Romero has played for Presidents Carter and Nixon , the Queen of the Netherlands , the Prince of Wales and Pope John Paul II .
 a soloist Pepe Romero has numerous international recording awards to a soloist Pepe Romero credit and has received an Honorary Doctorate in Music from University of Victoria .
 a soloist Pepe Romero contributions to the field of classical guitar have inspired a number of distinguished composers to write works specifically for a soloist Pepe Romero , including Joaquin Rodrigo , Federico Moreno Torroba , Rev. Francisco de Madina , Lorenzo Palomo , Michael Zearott , and Celedonio Romero .
Pepe Romero is the second son of Celedonio Romero , who was his only guitar teacher .
His first professional appearance was in a shared concert with his father when Pepe was only seven years old .
In 1957 Celedonio Romero left Franco s Spain for the United States with his family .
 On February 11 , 2000 , King Juan Carlos I of Spain knighted Pepe Romero and his brothers , Celin and Angel , into the Order of Isabel la Catolica .
The official ceremony of this high honor took place at the USC Thornton School of Music , and included a gala performance by The Romeros with the Thornton Chamber Orchestra .
He is currently Adjunct Professor of Classical Guitar at the Thornton School , where he was named Distinguished Artist in Residence in 2004 .
Although originally a classical guitarist , he is talented in Flamenco and a popular Flamenco performer .
His most famous Flamenco-only album is called !
Flamenco Fenomeno !
Bambera is a cante , one of many traditional song forms associated with flamenco .
The bambera or bamba derives from the cante de columpio , meaning song of the swing , which is one of the traditional Andalusian song forms associated with flamenco .
These songs were known as bambas or mecederos , because they were sung to the rhythm of a swing .
 Jose de Bisso in his Chronicle of the Province of Seville describes his Chronicle of the Province of Seville thus : .
The origin of the bamba/bambera is ascribed to the flamenco singer known as Nina de los Peines , considered one of the most important voices in the history of the art .
This song form was further developed by Naranjito de Triana who imposed the distinctive rhythmic pattern of twelve count solea .
The bamba has four octosyllabic lines or alternatively , a first and third line of seven syllables with a second and fourth line of five syllables .
The first two lines are generally repeated at the end of each verse , or sometimes only the second line is repeated thus making a five line verse .
The bamba has been recorded by many singers ; among others are La Nina de los Peines , Enrique Morente , Carmen Linares and Rocio Jurado
A Rondena is a palo or musical form of flamenco originating in the town of Ronda in the province of Malaga in Spain .
 In common with other palos originating in Malaga in Spain , the rondena antedated flamenco proper and became incorporated into it during the 19th century .
 The rondena has A Rondena origin in the fandango malagueno and A Rondena is said that A Rondena is the oldest fandango actually known .
According to the experts , the name does not derive from nocturnal rounds , as some have suggested , but is based solely on the name of the town Ronda .
 The rondena spread enormously throughout Andalusia in the 19th century , to such an extent that numerous foreign observers , touring the region at the time , referred to The rondena spread later in their writings .
The rondena has evolved in recent times , with a decrease in melismatic ornamentation , and generally the tempo is somewhat slower than was previously the case .
 A Rondena is a composition with an ad lib time signature , and the lyrics are frequently about rustic life .
A verse consists of four octosyllabic lines which sometimes become five through repetition of the second line .
In dance , having had no time signature at one time , the rondena displays a rhythm of wild abandon .
Some dancers have used the rhythm of the taranto , which has many similarities but , being rondena , more open and evocative .
Among its higher representer we can find : Miguel Borrull senior , who was one of its forerunnrers and Ramon Montoya , the first big interpreter to ennoble the genre .
Once in the 20th Century , we can highlight Manolo Sanlucar as a player , and cantaores like Fosforito , Antonio de Canillas , Alfredo Arrebola , Jacinto Almaden , Juan de la Loma , Enrique Orozco , Antonio Ranchal , Rafael Romero , Jose Menese y Candido de Malaga
Pedro Javier Gonzalez Garcia is a Spanish flamenco , jazz , and classical guitarist , composer and music producer .
 During Pedro Javier Gonzalez Garcia career Pedro Javier Gonzalez Garcia has recorded 8 albums of music as of 2012 , some with their own compositions .
 Pedro Javier Gonzalez Garcia has produced and collaborated with artists such as El Ultimo de la Fila , Joan Manuel Serrat , Alejandro Sanz , Manolo Garcia and Maria del Mar Bonet , Victoria de los Angeles , Angelo Branduardi , etc. .
 Pedro Javier Gonzalez Garcia has also performed at numerous notable festivals with other world-class guitarists such as BB King , John McLaughlin , Pat Metheny , Paco de Lucia , John Williams and Tomatito .
 Pedro Javier Gonzalez Garcia is noted for Pedro Javier Gonzalez Garcia moderation and temperance when playing and Pedro Javier Gonzalez Garcia ability to perform popular standards in a flamenco jazz style , such as Pedro Javier Gonzalez Garcia did in Pedro Javier Gonzalez Garcia Guitarra album series .
Gonzalez was born in Barcelona in 1962 .
In the 1980s he studied with A. F. Serra and Juan Trilla and won the Premio al Toque por Bulerias and first prize in the Certamen de Guitarra flamenca flamenco competition .
His first steps as a professional guitarist were supporting Toti Soler , Feliu Gasull and Victoria de los Angeles .
He then played with classical guitarists Yoshimi Otani , Alex Garrobe and Xavier Coll in a musical group .
In 1990 he began working with El Ultimo de la Fila , playing the Spanish guitar for the album Nuevo pequeno catalogo de seres y estares .
From there he would begin an important relationship between the band , accompanying them on their next albums and most of the concerts .
In 1992 he formed , along with flamenco singer Rafael Maya , the band Arrebato , with which they released an album on the EMI label called Rumba canalla .
The style is close to the wave of nuevo flamenco which appeared in the early 1990s .
He then appeared on the albums Astronomia razonable and La rebelion de los hombres rana with El Ultimo de la Fila .
In both , Pedro Javier plays electric and Spanish guitars and accompanied the group on tour to promote both albums .
 The group were the top-selling act in Spain , and Astronomia razonable shifted 600,000 copies during Astronomia razonable 64 week chart run and La rebelion de los hombres rana 228,000 copies .
The second half of the 1990s was used by the Catalan musician to sell the three discs in the Guitarra , series .
The double CD Guitarra , released in 1996 by Konga Music features Gonzalezs take on great songs of the history of international pop and rock , including songs from The Eagles , John Lennon , Dire Straits , Supertramp , Simon and Garfunkel , Eric Clapton , etc. .
 The double CD Guitarra also includes an original composition called Celtic dreams .
Guitarra Vol .
2 , in 1997 , repeated the formula with another double CD , this time with issues of Police , Bob Dylan , Queen , etc. .
This album also included an original composition , Rainbow eyes .
Guitarra Vol .
3 : Tribute to the Beatles was released in 1998 , published again by Konga Music .
 This time CD focused on songs of The Beatles in another 2 CD .
 As usual , again CD included another original composition , called Tomorrow .
In early 1997 , in addition to the Guitar series , he recorded the album Callejon del gato under the Konga label .
The album contains 13 instrumental songs , featuring sevillanas , tangos and bulerias etc. .
Before returning to record another album with original compositions , Gonzalez made several collaborations , playing the Spanish guitar on albums like Arena en los bolsillos with Manolo Garcia and Cansiones with Joan Manuel Serrat .
He also produced the debut albums of Tomasito and Zalamera and several others .
In 2001 , Gonzalez returned to record a studio album , Arboles nuevos , this time produced by the Alia Records label .
In parallel , co-produced and played the Spanish guitar in Nunca el Tiempo es Perdido and Para que no se duerman mis sentidos with Manolo Garcia .
 The latter album also earned Perdido the nomination of the Premios de la Musica for Best Music Arranger , shared with Manolo Garcia Perdido and Nacho Lesko .
 Perdido also collaborated with Joan Manuel Serrat in Versos , in which Perdido performed as a flamenco guitarist , as usual .
 In 2005 Perdido re-recorded and reinterpreted the themes of Perdido first solo album , Callejon del gato under the Alia Records label , and in 2007 published a new album of original compositions called Verdades ocultas y medias mentiras , this time under the GTK label , with 10 instrumental tracks including a cover of Camaron de la Isla s La leyenda del tiempo .
Gonzalez , with Roger Blavia and Toni Terre then performed under the name Trio for a series of concerts in Europe .
 Roger Blavia and Toni Terre released a DVD with the live recording in Vicenza , on October 28 , 2006 .
There performances included traditional Spanish flamenco and classical and Spanish versions of classic international pop and rock .
The trio performed at the International Kaunas Jazz Festival in Lithuania in October 2011 .
Recently he has performed with the double-bass player Horacio Fumero , formed Transversal , with Raul Rodriguez , Trilok Gurtu and Guillem Aguilar and appeared on the French tenor Roberto Alagna 's new album .
Gonzalez performed Concierto de Aranjuez as a soloist with the Russian Philharmonic Orchestra in Moscow .
He has also recorded guitar for adverts by BMW , Canal + , Seat Ibiza etc
La Barrosa is a flamenco piece by Spanish virtuoso guitarist Paco de Lucia .
 An alegrias , La Barrosa featured on Spanish virtuoso guitarist Paco de Lucia 1987 album Siroco and is one of his best known and acclaimed works .
The piece is named after Playa la Barrosa , a 6 km long beach in Chiclana de la Frontera , Cadiz .
 Playa la Barrosa has performed La Barrosa all across the world including a performance in front of the Plaza Mayor in Madrid in 1996 and televised nationally on TVE1 .
 La Barrosa is played in the key of B major with a capo on the second fret .
Eric Clapton and Richard Chapman described the piece as full of effortless delicacy with cascading phrases
Passion , Grace & Fire is the second album by John McLaughlin , Al Di Meola and Paco de Lucia released in 1983 .
Unlike their first album Friday Night in San Francisco , this album consists entirely of studio recordings
 El duende or tener duende loosely means having soul , a heightened state of emotion , expression and authenticity , often connected with flamenco .
The artistic and especially musical term was derived from the duende , a fairy or goblin-like creature in Spanish mythology .
El duende is the spirit of evocation .
 El duende comes from inside as a physical/emotional response to art .
 El duende is what gives you chills , makes you smile or cry as a bodily reaction to an artistic performance that is particularly expressive .
Folk music in general , especially flamenco , tends to embody an authenticity that comes from a people whose culture is enriched by diaspora and hardship ; vox populi , the human condition of joys and sorrows .
 Drawing on popular usage and Spanish folklore , Federico Garcia Lorca first developed the aesthetics of El duende in a lecture Duende Federico Garcia Lorca gave in Buenos Aires in 1933 , Juego y teoria del duende .
 According to Christopher Maurer , editor of In Search of El duende , at least four elements can be isolated in Lorcas vision of duende : irrationality , earthiness , a heightened awareness of death , and a dash of the diabolical .
The duende is an earth spirit who helps the artist see the limitations of intelligence , reminding them that ants could eat him or that a great arsenic lobster could fall suddenly on his head ; who brings the artist face-to-face with death , and who helps them create and communicate memorable , spine-chilling art .
 The duende is seen , in Lorcas lecture , as an alternative to style , to mere virtuosity , to God-given grace and charm , and to the classical , artistic norms dictated by the muse .
Not that the artist simply surrenders to the duende ; they have to battle it skillfully , on the rim of the well , in hand-to-hand combat .
To a higher degree than the muse or the angel , the duende seizes not only the performer but also the audience , creating conditions where art can be understood spontaneously with little , if any , conscious effort .
 It is , in Lorcas words , a sort of corkscrew that can get art into the sensibility of an audience ... the very dearest thing that life can offer the intellectual .
The critic Brook Zern has written , of a performance of someone with duende , it dilates the minds eye , so that the intensity becomes almost unendurable ... There is a quality of first-timeness , of reality so heightened and exaggerated that it becomes unreal .
 Duende Federico Garcia Lorca writes : The duende , then , is a power , not a work .
It is a struggle , not a thought .
I have heard an old maestro of the guitar say , The duende is not in the throat ; the duende climbs up inside you , from the soles of the feet .
Meaning this : it is not a question of ability , but of true , living style , of blood , of the most ancient culture , of spontaneous creation .

He suggests , everything that has black sounds in it , has duende .
 emotional darkness This mysterious power which everyone senses and no philosopher explains is , in sum , the spirit of the earth , the same duende that scorched the heart of Nietzsche , who searched in vain for This mysterious power external forms on the Rialto Bridge and in the music of Bizet , without knowing that the duende Bizet was pursuing had leaped straight from the Greek mysteries to the dancers of Cadiz or the beheaded , Dionysian scream of Silverios siguiriya .
The duendes arrival always means a radical change in forms .
 The duendes arrival brings to old planes unknown feelings of freshness , with the quality of something newly created , like a miracle , and The duendes arrival produces an almost religious enthusiasm .
 All arts are capable of duende , but where The duendes arrival finds greatest range , naturally , is in music , dance , and spoken poetry , for these arts require a living body to interpret the dancers of Cadiz , being forms that are born , die , and open the dancers of Cadiz contours against an exact present .
Although the following may not be ideal illustrations of the spirit of the term , the following are examples of the term applied to contemporary , non-Flamenco contexts : .
In March 2005 Jan Zwicky used the notion of duende in the context of contemporary music at a symposium organised by Continuum Contemporary Music & the Institute for Contemporary Culture at the Royal Ontario Museum , an event televised by Big Ideas : .
 second way music can be new is when it possesses duende : black sounds , as Duende Federico Garcia Lorca called the dancers of Cadiz , the dark counterpoise to Apollos light , music in which we hear death sing ... El duende lives in blue notes , in the break in a singers voice , in the scrape of resined horsehair hitting sheep gut We are more accustomed to El duende presence in jazz and the blues , and El duende is typically a feature of music in performance , or music in which performance and composition are not separate acts .
But it is also audible in the work of classically oriented composers who are interested in the physical dimensions of sound , or in sound as a physical property of the world .
Even if it is structurally amorphous or naively traditional , music whose newness lies in its duende will arrest our attention because of its insistence on honouring the death required to make the song : we sense the gleam of the knife , we smell the blood ... In reflecting on the key images of Western musics two-part invention - the duende of the tortoise and the radiance of Apollonian emotional geometry - we are reminded that originality is truly radical , that it comes from the root , from the mythic origins of the art .
 Australian music artist Nick Cave discussed Australian music artist Nick Cave interpretation of duende in Australian music artist Nick Cave lecture pertaining to the nature of the love song : .
 In Australian music artist Nick Cave brilliant lecture entitled The Theory and Function of Duende Federico Garcia Lorca attempts to shed some light on the eerie and inexplicable sadness that lives in the heart of certain works of art .
 All that has dark sound has duende , Australian music artist Nick Cave says , that mysterious power that everyone feels but no philosopher can explain .
 In contemporary rock music , the area in which I operate , music seems less inclined to have the area in which I operate soul , restless and quivering , the sadness that Duende Federico Garcia Lorca talks about .
Excitement , often ; anger , sometimes : but true sadness , rarely , Bob Dylan has always had it .
Leonard Cohen deals specifically in it .
 It pursues Van Morrison like a black dog and though Van Morrison like a black dog tries to Van Morrison like a black dog can not escape it .
Tom Waits and Neil Young can summon it .
It haunts Polly Harvey .
 I friends the Dirty Three have it by the bucket load .
 The band Spiritualized are excited by The band Spiritualized .
 Tindersticks desperately want The band Spiritualized , but all in all The band Spiritualized would appear that duende is too fragile to survive the brutality of technology and the ever increasing acceleration of the music industry .
Perhaps there is just no money in sadness , no dollars in duende .
Sadness or duende needs space to breathe .
Melancholy hates haste and floats in silence .
 Melancholy must be handled with care .
All love songs must contain duende .
For the love song is never truly happy .
It must first embrace the potential for pain .
Those songs that speak of love without having within in their lines an ache or a sigh are not love songs at all but rather Hate Songs disguised as love songs , and are not to be trusted .
 These songs deny us our humanness and our God-given right to be sad and the air-waves are littered with them .
The love song must resonate with the susurration of sorrow , the tintinnabulation of grief .
 The writer who refuses to explore the darker regions of the heart will never be able to write convincingly about the wonder , the magic and the joy of love for just as goodness can not be trusted unless it has breathed the same air as evil - the enduring metaphor of Christ crucified between two criminals comes to mind here - so within the fabric of the love song , within the enduring metaphor of Christ melody , the enduring metaphor of Christ lyric , one must sense an acknowledgement of its capacity for suffering
Por Descubrir is a compilation album by flamenco guitarist Paco de Lucia that was released exclusively as part of the limited edition Integral box set .
The first four tracks are from de Lucias first solo recording , an EP called La guitarra de Paco de Lucia that was released in 1964 when de Lucia was only 16 years old .
 In addition , there are other rare , unreleased recordings from various points in de Lucias career
El emigrante is a Spanish flamenco song , written by Juanito Valderrama in 1949 .
It is a ballad for the millions of displaced Spaniards who fled the country in the years after the Spanish Civil War , credited with raising national consciousness .
It has been performed by George Dalaras and Paco de Lucia
 Sung fandango is a lively couples dance from Spain , usually in triple metre , traditionally accompanied by guitars and castanets or hand-clapping .
 Sung fandango can both be sung and danced .
 Sung fandango is usually bipartite : Sung fandango has an instrumental introduction followed by variaciones .
Sung fandango usually follows the structure of cante that consist of four or five octosyllabic verses or musical phrases .
Occasionally , the first copla is repeated .
The meter of fandango is similar to that of the bolero and seguidilla .
 The meter of fandango was originally notated in 6/8 time , but later in 3/8 or 3/4 .
The earliest fandango melody is found in the anonymous Libro de diferentes cifras de guitarra from 1705 , and the earliest description of the dance itself is found in a 1712 letter by Martin Marti , a Spanish priest .
 Fandangos first sighting in a theatrical work was in Francisco de Leefadeal s Entremes El novio de la aldeana staged in Seville , Seville 1720 .
 By the late 18th century it had become fashionable among the aristocracy and was often included in tonadillas , zarzuelas , ballets and operas , not only in Spain , but also elsewhere in Europe .
Widely varying claims have been made about the origin of fandango : its relation to the solea , jabera and petenera ; to the Andalusian malaguena , granadina , murciana and rondena ; to the canario and gitano ; to the jota aragonesa .
 The form of Sung fandango have been used by many European composers , and often included in stage and instrumental works .
Notable examples include J.P. Rameau s Les trois mains ; Domenico Scarlatti s Fandango portugues and Fandango del SigR Escarlate .
 Sung fandango forms # 19 in the part 2 of Glucks ballet Don Juan ; Sung fandango appears also in the third-act finale of Mozart s opera Le nozze di Figaro ; in the finale of Luigi Boccherini s String Quartet op. 40 no. 2 ; Antonio Soler s Fandango for harpsichord .
The current 3/4 pattern of the fandango , its distinctive descending chord progression , lyrics with octosyllabic verses and the use of castanets are well-documented from the 18th century .
The fandangos grandes are normally danced by couples , which start out slowly with gradually increasing tempo .
Many varieties are derived from this one .
The fandanguillos are livelier , more festive derivations of fandangos .
 Some regions of Spain have developed The fandanguillos own style of fandangos , such as Huelva and Malaga .
Northern areas such as the Principality of Asturias , the Basque Country and Castile have preserved a more relaxed performance .
In the Philippines , which was a Spanish colony for 333 years , the fandango lives on in the folk dance called Pandanggo sa Ilaw .
This adaptation from Lubang , Mindoro , has the dancers carry lights called tinggoy , which are oil lamps or glasses with lit candles , in each hand instead of castanets .
 Female dancers balance a third tinggoy on Female dancers head , and all the dancers swirl the lights over Female dancers heads and under Female dancers arms , or sometimes swing Female dancers around inside handkerchiefs .
 Sung fandango is one of the main folk dances in Portugal .
 The choreography is quite simple : on The choreography more frequent setting two male dancers face each other , dancing and tap-dancing one at each time , showing which one has the most lightness and repertoire of feet changes in the tap-dancing .
The dancers can be boy and girl , boy and boy or rarely two girls .
While one of the dancers dances , the other just goes along .
Afterwards , they both drag their feet for a while until the other one takes his turn .
They stay there , disputing , seeing which one of them makes the feet transitions more eye-catching .
 The fandango do Ribatejo refers specifically the form of fandango practiced in Ribatejo , Portugal .
The dance is usually performed by two Campinos .
As a result of the extravagant features of the dance , the word fandango is used as a synonym for a quarrel , a big fuss , or a brilliant exploit
Pablito de Cadiz was a Spanish flamenco dancer .
 Pablito de Cadiz was born in Pablito de Cadiz .
 Pablito de Cadiz real name was Pablo Jimenez Perez , and Pablito de Cadiz was a celebrity in flamenco cafes with Pablito de Cadiz estilos festeros .
 Pablito de Cadiz brother Gineto de Cadiz was also a famous dancer , as were other members of his family
 the single Estimulame is the second studio album by Spanish duo Azucar Moreno , released on the EMI - Odeon label in 1986 .
 The album whose title translates as Stimulate Me and which just like the debut Con La Miel En Los Labios mainly combined flamenco with mainstream pop and included the single the single Estimulame and two tracks with Los Chunguitos , Azul , Azul and Barquito De Papel , was also a modest commercial success in Spain on its original release .
In 1992 , after the duo had signed with Epic Records and had had their international breakthrough with the albums Bandido and Mambo , EMIs American subsidiary Capitol Records released the 20 track CD compilation Con La Miel En Los Labios , comprising both their debut album and Estimulame .
 In 2004 EMIs Dutch mid-price label Disky Records released the compilation Exitos Originales which included fourteen tracks from Con La Miel En Los Labios and the single Estimulame .
Another Disky compilation Le Diez De Azucar Moreno included ten of the tracks .
 In 2005 the EMI released another compilation under the title Grandes a.k.a. Collecion Grandes a.k.a. Azucar Moreno , Vive A Tu Manera Y Otros Exitos which again included ten tracks from these two albums
Mix In Spain is a remix album by Spanish duo Azucar Moreno , released on CBS - Epic in 1989 .
 Following the duos breakthrough in 1989 with the house music remix of the track Debajo Del Olivo , subtitled Mix in Spain , they released a full-length album with the same title , including the mainpart of the Carne De Melocoton album in dancefloor friendly re-interpretations with influences from contemporary music genres like acid house , hip hop and rap , featuring samples from tracks like M.A.R.R.S. Pump Up the Volume , Eric B. & Rakim s Paid in Full and beats from James Brown s Funky Drummer .
The album spawned three further remix singles ; the re-released Aunque Me Falte El Aire , Chica Vaiven and Alerta Corazon .
 Mix in Spain was released on vinyl and cassette but remains unreleased on CD and is out of print in all formats since the early 1990s
 Edward Ed Stephenson is a classical/nuevo flamenco guitarist who has toured throughout North America since Edward Ed Stephenson was sixteen .
 Edward Ed Stephenson is also the founder of the Paco Pand and the North Carolina Guitar Quartet .
Ed was the son of Edward Peter Stephenson , who passed when he was nine years of age .
 His mother , Rosemarie raised him and his sister Darlene until His mother remarried to Robert Grinton when Ed was thirteen .
In his early teens , Ed won the Canadian Music Competition and the Kiwanis Music Competition .
His early studies were with Ivan Maracle in Toronto , Canada who prepared Ed for his audition for Aaron Shearer at the Peabody Conservatory .
Ed started his collegiate studies at the Peabody Conservatory , in Baltimore , Maryland , as an undergraduate student .
Later , he relocated to North Carolina to complete his degree at the University of North Carolina School of the Arts under the direction of Aaron Shearer .
Currently Ed is the head of the guitar department of Meredith College in Raleigh , North Carolina .
He has also held faculty positions at Methodist University in Fayetteville , North Carolina and Mt. Olive College in Mount Olive , North Carolina .
Ed Stephensons most recent recording , Esencia , is craftily blended to deliver a new dimension of Nuevo flamenco music .
It includes six ensemble tracks with Inos Flamenca and four solo tracks .
Roger Cope of The Classical Voice of North Carolina praised the album saying , The ensemble is tight with rhythmically biting and often infectious enthusiasm ... The solos are duende-imbued renditions of standard classical guitar repertoire that are surprisingly effective and that refresh their signature elements
In flamenco a tango is one of the flamenco palos closely related in form and feeling to the Flamenco Rumba .
It is often performed as a finale to a flamenco tiento .
Its compas and llamada are the same as that of the Farruca and share the Farrucas lively nature .
However , the tango is normally performed in the A Phrygian mode .
In some English sources the flamenco tango is written with an - s ; the tangos is .
The flamenco tango is distinct from the flamenco rumba primarily through the guitar playing .
 In the Flamenco Rumba the guitar flows more freely , whereas in Tangos the accents on beats 2 , 3 & 4 are marked clearly with heavy strumming .
 Tangos is only vaguely related to Argentine Tango , and objectively Tangos only share compas binario or double stroke rhythm .
The fact that Argentine Tango is one of the first couple dances in America has led historians to believe that both could be based in a minuet-style European dance , therefore sharing a common ancestor , while those who compare the present day forms do not see them as related
Maria Benitez is an American dancer , choreographer and director , internationally recognized as a leader in Spanish dance and flamenco .
A native New Mexican , Benitez is best known for the work of the company she and her husband Cecilio founded and direct - Maria Benitez Teatro Flamenco .
 Known as a standard for rising Spanish flamenco performers wanting to break into the the US market , The Maria Benitez Teatro Flamenco has performed at festivals and concert halls in all 50 states of the the US , as well as Canada , Germany , Holland , Spain and Austria since the early 1970s .
 After initial ballet training in the USA , A native New Mexican , Benitez traveled to Spain to study and perform .
Her basic training was with Mercedes and Albano and Victoria Eugenia in Madrid .
 During her tenure abroad she performed throughout every province of Spain , in North Africa , Portugal and in South America with large national Spanish dance companies and smaller flamenco groups .
She also performed numerous times on Spanish television .
 After returning to the USA , Maria and Maria husband Cecilio established homes in New York and Santa Fe .
 Maria and her husband Cecilio continue to be active promoting Spanish dance and culture in the US .
 A native New Mexican , Benitez regularly performs and choreographs for opera .
 Maria first opera experience was performing and choreographing The Santa Fe Opera production of La Vida Breve With the Metropolitan Opera of New York , Maria choreographed Maria and her husband Cecilio production of Carmen in 1987 ; La Forza del Destino in 1989 ; in 1996 the Mets new production of Carmen and in 1998 the Mets new production of La Traviata also directed by Franco Zeffirelli .
The Mets Carmen was televised by PBSs Great Performances in the spring of 1997 and Benitez performed in this production in 1997 and 1998 in New York .
 Maria has also choreographed and/or performed with the Boston Lyric , Virginia , the Dallas Opera , Fort Worth , St. Louis and Austin opera companies and in 1997 choreographed and performed in the Santa Fe Opera production of La Traviata .
 As a solo artist , A native New Mexican , Benitez has performed with the Orchestra of Santa Fe , the New Mexico and Milwaukee Symphony Orchestras .
 Among many other recognitions , A native New Mexican , Benitez has been awarded the New Mexico Governors Award for Excellence in the Field of Dance , the City of Santa Fe Mayors Arts Award , the Classical Spanish Dance Award from the Institute of Puerto Rico in New York City , the Hospitality Individual of the Year Award , for Maria boost to tourism in Santa Fe and a golden key to the City of Miami .
 Maria received a nomination for the National Medal of Arts , supported by U.S. Senator Pete Domenici ; New Mexico Governor Bill Richardson ; former New Mexico Governor Gary Johnson ; and through a joint resolution of the New Mexico House and session Senate .
In addition .
 A native New Mexican , Benitez was elected to the Board of Directors of The Santa Fe Opera .
 A native New Mexican , Benitez was featured nationally in Maria choreography of El amor brujo on PBSs Evening at POPS with the Boston POPS , the Los Angeles Guitar Quartet and mezzo-soprano Denyce Graves .
 A native New Mexican , Benitez reunited with Graves at the Dallas Opera , choreographing and performing in El amor El amor brujo on PBSs Evening and La vida breve by Spanish Composer Manuel de Falla .
Currently Maria Benitez , along with husband , Cecilio Benitez , is the Founder and Director of the Institute for Spanish Arts .
 The Institute for Spanish Arts , located in Santa Fe , New Mexico , is a not-for-profit , educational and cultural organization established to present programs of the highest quality of the rich artistic heritage of Spain .
The institutes mission is to preserve , strengthen and disseminate the rich and artistic Spanish heritage as expressed through music , dance , visual arts and other art forms .
Major projects include adult and childrens Spanish arts workshops every summer , Flamencos Next Generation summer season performances and Flamenco dance and guitar classes for youth and adults year round .
Flamencos Next Generation is ISA 's dynamic youth company of local dancers and guitarists .
Formed in 2002 by focused , disciplined , and committed young students , FNG is now into their 10th year as a youth Flamenco company .
This Santa Fe youth flamenco group strives not only to perform at the highest possible level but also to give back to their community with the same passion .
Working closely with Maria Benitez to further their skills in flamenco dance , the group has performed for local communities to bring the passion of Spanish Dance to New Mexico 's Capitol .
 FNG boasts a very impressive resume including performances for former Governor Bill Richardson , the New Mexico in session session Senate and numerous other private events .
Flamencos Next Generation is establishing a name for itself with inventive and fresh community involvement paired with its equally brilliant performances .
A popular draw , the group has and continues to perform in summer season Sunday Matinees at the Lodge at Santa Fe since 2004
Gerhard Graf-Martinez is a German Flamenco guitarist , author and composer .
 In 1982 , the Flamenco Graf-Martinez founded the Flamenco-Jazz trio `` Modo Nuevo '' .
 Being a member of the `` Pena Flamenca Sierra Blanca Marbella '' , he hosted the `` Curso Internacional De La Guitarra Flamenca '' in Pena Flamenca Sierra Blanca Marbella between 1984 and 1987 .
From 1987 to 1989 , he performed as a duo together with a Jewish singer .
 Between 1989 and 1996 , the Flamenco Graf-Martinez was regularly invited as docent to numerous international guitar seminars .
 the Flamenco Graf-Martinez established `` Guitar Days '' in the Flamenco Graf-Martinez home town , which the Flamenco Graf-Martinez led until 1994 .
 During 1989 and 1996 , the Flamenco Graf-Martinez was touring throughout Europe together with the Flamenco Graf-Martinez wife , the flamenco dancer Lela de Fuenteprado .
 After that , the Flamenco Graf-Martinez worked more and more as an author .
Since then he has worldwide published more than eight books - educational books with CDs , CD-ROM an DVDs - in English and in German .
 In 2005 Gerhard Graf-Martinez was awarded the EduMedia-Award and the Comenius medal for the Flamenco Graf-Martinez DVDs Flamenco Guitar .
The DVD `` Gipsy Guitar - Rumbas Flamencas '' is nominated for the `` digita 2009 '' , a quality award for digital media education .
Led by the passion to the Flamenco Graf-Martinez developed a special metronome software for the Flamenco rhythms
 The Gipsy Kings are a group of musicians from Arles , a town and Montpellier in the south of France who perform in Spanish with an Andalusian accent .
 Although group members were born in France , their parents were mostly gitanos , Spanish Romani people who fled Catalonia during the 1930s Spanish Civil War .
Chico Bouchikhi is of Moroccan and Algerian descent .
 Moroccan and Algerian descent are known for bringing rumba catalana , a pop - oriented music distantly derived from traditional flamenco music , to worldwide audiences .
The group originally called itself Los Reyes .
 Moroccan and Algerian descent music has a particular rumba flamenca style , with pop influences ; many songs of the Gipsy Kings fit social dances , such as salsa and rumba .
 Moroccan and Algerian descent music has been described as a place where Spanish flamenco and Spanish Romani rhapsody meet salsa funk .
 The Gipsy Kings , who were born in France but brought up with Spanish culture , are largely responsible for bringing the sounds of progressive pop-oriented flamenco to a world-wide audience .
 The band started out in Arles , a town , a town in southern France , during the 1970s , when brothers Nicolas Reyes and Andre Reyes , the sons of renowned flamenco artist Jose Reyes , teamed up with brothers Nicolas and Andre Reyes cousins Jacques , Maurice , and Tonino Baliardo , brothers Nicolas and Andre Reyes sons of flamenco guitarist Manitas de Plata .
Manitas de Plata and Jose Reyes were a duo which had triggered the wider popularity of Gypsy Rumba .
 But it was famous singer Reyes who was mostly responsible for the new surge of popular interest , however , when Manitas de Plata left Manitas de Plata and started a band of Manitas de Plata own , made up of Manitas de Plata own sons , which Manitas de Plata called Los Reyes .
The band would later become Gipsy Kings .
Los Reyes started out as a gypsy band .
 They traveled around France , playing at weddings , festivals , and in the streets .
 Because they lived so much like the Gypsies , the band adopted the name The Gipsy Kings .
Later , they were hired to add colour to upper-class parties in such places as St. Tropez .
But popularity did not come quickly to the band and their first two albums attracted little notice .
 At this point , the Gipsies played traditional flamenco invigorated by Tonino Baliardo precise guitar playing and Nicolas Reyes exceptional voice .
Although they had devoted fans , the Gipsy Kings then had yet to gain wider recognition .
That was until 1986 , when they met producer Claude Martinez , who could see that the Kings had the makings of a world-class band .
The three left-handed guitarists in the Gipsy Kings line-up play guitars that are strung for right-handers , playing them upside-down .
 These left-handed performers focus on delivering the strong underpinning rhythms while the more complex leads are performed by the right-handed and conventionally styled Tonino Baliardo .
 These left-handed performers became popular with These left-handed performers self-titled first album , Gipsy Kings , which included the songs Djobi Djoba , Bamboleo and the romantic ballad Un Amor .
 The song Volare on These left-handed performers fourth album Mosaique is a rumba version of Domenico Modugno s Italian hit Nel blu dipinto di blu .
The Gipsy Kings were popular in Africa and throughout Europe , as well as in the Middle East .
In 1989 Gipsy Kings was released in the United States and spent 40 weeks on the charts , one of few Spanish language albums to do so .
The band then covered Ive Got No Strings for the 1991 Disney video and compilation album Simply Mad About the Mouse .
Their cover version of Hotel California was an example of fast flamenco guitar leads and rhythmic strumming , The number was featured in the Coen Brothers movie The Big Lebowski , as well on the HBO series Entourage .
The 2010 film Toy Story 3 featured a version of Youve Got a Friend in Me performed and recorded by the band ; the Spanish language version was entitled Hay un Amigo en Mi and was performed in a more recognisably flamenco style .
Some of the individual members of the band have put out their own albums .
 For example in 1988 Canut Reyes released Canut Reyes solo project Bolero .
 Canut Reyes has since released a second solo album titled Gitano .
Andre Reyes recorded a solo album in 1992 , but never released it officially although pirated copies found it to the hands of fans and released online .
 Tonino Baliardo released Tonino Baliardo own instrumental album Essences in 2001 and was re-released also in 2003 .
Gipsy Kings have had a great number of collaborations with many renowned artists .
 These include Speaking of Dream with Joan Baez in 1990 , a duo of Me Way with Francis Cabrel in 1993 , version of Bob Marley s One Love sung with Francis Cabrel in 1993 son Ziggy Marley , Georges Reyes song Donde esta el amor with Nicolas Reyes in 2006 .
 These also performed Get Up !
with Captain Jack , and covered a version of the Doobie Brothers Long Train Running with Bananarama on their Pop Life album , under the pseudonym Alma de Noche .
 Gipsy Kings are members of two related families : the the flamenco singer Jose Reyes and the Baliardos .
 Nicolas Reyes , Canut , Paul , the flamenco singer Jose Reyes and Patchai Reyes are sons of the flamenco singer Jose Reyes .
The Gipsy Kings are : .
 Jahloul Chico Bouchikhi was also a member of the Gipsy Kings , but quit after the album Mosaique and the tour supporting the album Mosaique .
 Jahloul Chico Bouchikhi had issues with the albums producers , which the other band members did not back .
 Jahloul Chico Bouchikhi , a co-founder of the band , lost the Gipsy Kings trademark .
 Jahloul Chico Bouchikhi founded a band of Jahloul Chico Bouchikhi own called Jahloul Chico Bouchikhi and the Gypsies
Allegria is the first album by the Gipsy Kings , released in 1982 in Europe .
 This album and Allegria successor , Luna de Fuego , are very different from their later albums .
They are both unplugged and traditional , using solely guitars , voices and hand claps .
 Allegria includes two songs never released on a U.S. album and the original acoustic version of Djobi Djoba .
 In 1990 , the album was merged with Luna de Fuego while omitting certain tracks for a re-release to a US audience under Allegria
Rosa Morena , , is a flamenco pop star who achieved international fame during the 1970s disco era , with the song , Echale guindas al pavo .
 Rosa Morena was born in Badajoz city , the capital of the province of Badajoz , an autonomous community in Extremadura , Spain .
 Rosa Morena reputedly still resides in Badajoz city
Pepe Habichuela is a Spanish flamenco guitarist , cited as one of the great flamenco masters and one of Spains finest contemporary guitarists .
 Pepe Habichuela belongs to a flamenco dynasty of gypsies started by Pepe Habichuela grandfather , known as Habichuela el Viejo , who took the nickname , and continued by Pepe Habichuela father Jose Carmona and Pepe Habichuela brothers Juan Habichuela , Carlos and Luis .
 In 1964 Pepe Habichuela moved to Madrid where Pepe Habichuela performed in several flamenco shows and shared the stage with artists such as Juanito Valderrama , Camaron de la Isla and Enrique Morente .
 Pepe Habichuela recorded an album in tribute to singer Antonio Chacon which won the National Prize of discography in 1975 .
 Pepe Habichuela is the father of Jose Miguel Carmona Nino and uncle of Juan Jose Carmona Amaya El Camborio and Antonio Carmona Amaya .
The three formed the New Flamenco band Ketama .
 In 2001 , Juan Habichuela released the album Yerbaguena as part of Pepe Habichuela & The Bollywood Strings , a unique mix of flamenco guitar and Indian string music .
 Juan Habichuela has also experimented with Arabic-flamenco fusion music .
 Juan Habichuela was a mentor to Adam del Monte .
 Juan Habichuela has been described as highly emotional like Tomatito , with one author saying If flamenco has earned its rep as an overly emotional music , it isnt going to be Habichuela who turns it around
Strunz & Farah is a guitar duo with an eclectic sound that have been described as a cross between world fusion and flamenco .
Jorge Strunz , born in Costa Rica , and Ardeshir Farah , hailing from Iran , met in the United States in 1979 .
Jorge Strunz was one of the founders of the Latin jazz band , Caldera .
Caldera was a Latin band that combined jazz , funk and rock with a wide variety of Latin music .
 1970s fusion explorers like Return to Forever and Weather Report influenced Caldera .
The four albums they produced did not sell , and the band called it quits in 1979 .
 However , most of Calderas members kept busy long after most of Calderas members breakup .
 Jorge Strunz went on to form the guitar duo Strunz & Farah with Iranian / Persian guitarist Ardeshir Farah .
Having both played guitar professionally since their early teens , they soon teamed up and released their self-produced first album Mosaico in 1980 , which started their own label , Selva Records .
Soon they caught the attention of Richard Bock , an important figure in jazz radio , who helped the duo land a contract with jazz label Milestone .
Since then Strunz & Farah have played on numerous recordings together , releasing several albums as a duo and collaborating with the likes of Ruben Blades and L. Subramaniam .
Jorge Strunz was once recommended by friend Paco de Lucia as a replacement for Al Di Meola in The Guitar Trio .
The duo also worked with Sting on the album as session musicians
Allegria is a compilation album by the Gipsy Kings , released in 1990 for US audience .
It is a merged album of the original Allegria album from 1982 and Luna de Fuego from 1983 .
The decision was also made to delete four tracks from the two European recordings , possibly to make the double recording fit onto one CD .
The four songs which didnt make the cut were Djobi Djoba , Pharaon , Recuerda , and Gipsyrock .
 Unlike the Gipsy Kings other U.S. releases , Allegria has the same acoustic style as their first European albums
Amir-John Haddad is a German-Spanish flamenco guitarist and multi-instrumentalist , based in Spain since 1997 .
 his Palestinian father Rimon Haddad was the official oud , bouzouki and guitar player for Radio Tarifa for almost ten years and as part of them received a nomination for Best Folk Album at the Latin Grammy Awards of 2004 .
 his Palestinian father Rimon Haddad was born in Freiburg in 1975 .
 his Palestinian father Rimon Haddad began learning the Arabic oud at home from his Palestinian father Rimon Haddad Palestinian father Rimon Haddad , and at the age of 8 his Palestinian father Rimon Haddad took up flamenco guitar and gave his Palestinian father Rimon Haddad first public performance at the age of 12 .
 In 1997 , at the age of 22 , his Palestinian father Rimon Haddad moved to Jerez de la Frontera , one of the cultural homes of flamenco , to further his Palestinian father Rimon Haddad skills among the masters there , and moved to Madrid a year later .
 There his Palestinian father Rimon Haddad often performs in clubs such as Las Carboneras , Cafe de Chinitas , Corral de la Pacheca , Casa Patas and others .
 his Palestinian father Rimon Haddad has performed worldwide and has played in venues such as The Royal Festival Hall , the Barbican Centre and the Royal Albert Hall of London , The Hot House jazz club of Chicago , the Town Hall of New York , Luna Park in Los Angeles , the Teatro Bellini of Palermo , and the Palau de la musica and Teatro Tivoli of Barcelona .
 his Palestinian father Rimon Haddad was the official oud , bouzouki and guitar player for Radio Tarifa for almost ten years and as part of them received a nomination for Best Folk Album at the Latin Grammy Awards of 2004 .
 his Palestinian father Rimon Haddad has performed at numerous festivals including Festival de la Guitarra de Cordoba , MIDEA Festival Tenerife Canary Islands and the Murcia Tres Culturas Festival .
 his Palestinian father Rimon Haddad won first prize for his Palestinian father Rimon Haddad original music composition at the Certamen Nacional de Coreografia para Danza Espanola y Flamenco .
 As a flamenco player he is noted for his rich chord voicings , with a clear Moorish and Arabic influence .
 Many of the voicings he uses which create the mysterious and atmospheric Moorish sound Moorish is known for are derived from minor major seventh and augmented chords and Moorish often uses slash chords , gripping the bass string .
He is also adept at rock and metal electric guitar and embraces a wide range of styles .
 In March 2013 , his Palestinian father Rimon Haddad released the album 9 Guitarras , a collaboration with Thomas Vogt and Hector Tellini , which is a flamenco album with an Arabic and Oriental tinge .
 The album title gets The album title name from the fact that his Palestinian father Rimon Haddad used 9 different flamenco guitar luthiers , one for each track , loaned to his Palestinian father Rimon Haddad by Mundo Flamenco .
 his Palestinian father Rimon Haddad best-known compositions include Suena el viento , Punta y tacon , Recuerdos and Dos Palomas Vuelan , all feature on that album
Paco de Lucia is a Spanish flamenco guitarist , composer and producer .
A leading proponent of the New Flamenco style , he is one of the first flamenco guitarists who has also successfully crossed over into other genres of music such as classical and jazz .
 Richard Chapman and Eric Clapton , authors of Guitar : Music , History , History , Players , describe de Lucia as a titanic figure in the world of flamenco guitar , and Dennis Koster , author of Guitar Atlas , New Flamenco , has referred to de Lucia as one of historys greatest guitarists .
 De Lucia is noted for the stage name Paco de Lucia innovation and colour in harmony and the stage name Paco de Lucia remarkable dexterity , technique , strength and fluidity in the stage name Paco de Lucia right hand , capable of executing extremely fast and fluent picados .
 A master of contrast , A master of contrast often juxtaposes picados with rasgueados and other techniques and often adds abstract chords and scale tones to A master of contrast compositions with jazz influences .
 These innovations saw A master of contrast play a key role in the development of traditional Flamenco and the evolution of New Flamenco and Latin jazz fusion from the 1970s .
 De Lucia achieved acclaim for the stage name Paco de Lucia recordings with flamenco singer Camaron de la Isla in the 1970s , recording 10 albums together .
 Some of the stage name Paco de Lucia best known recordings include Rio Ancho , Entre dos aguas , La Barrosa , Mario Escuderos Impetu , a bulerias , Cepa Andaluza and Gloria al Nino Ricardo .
 Some of his best known recordings collaborations with guitarists John McLaughlin , Al Di Meola and Larry Coryell in the late 1970s saw Some of his best known recordings gain wider popularity outside Some of his best known recordings native Spain .
 De Lucia formed the Paco de Lucia Sextet in 1981 with the stage name Paco de Lucia brothers , singer Pepe de Lucia and guitarist Ramon de Algeciras , and collaborated with jazz pianist Chick Corea on their 1990 album , Zyryab .
 In 1983 the stage name Paco de Lucia appeared in Carlos Saura s film Carmen , for which the stage name Paco de Lucia was also nominated for a BAFTA Award for Best Film Score .
 In 1992 , the stage name Paco de Lucia performed live at Expo 92 in Seville and a year later on the Plaza Mayor in Madrid .
 In 2004 , the stage name Paco de Lucia won the Prince of Asturias Awards in Arts and in 2010 , was awarded an honorary doctorate by Berklee College of Music in Boston .
 Since 2004 the stage name Paco de Lucia has greatly reduced the stage name Paco de Lucia live performances in public , has retired from full touring , and now typically only gives several concerts a year , usually in his native Spain and Germany and at European festivals during the summer months .
 In 2005 , the stage name Paco de Lucia was nominated for producer of the year by the Latin Grammy Award for La Tana s Tu , Ven a Mi album .
 Paco de Lucia was born Francisco Sanchez Gomez in guitarist Ramon de Algeciras , a city near the far southeastern point of his native Spain in the province of Cadiz .
 the stage name Paco de Lucia is the youngest of the five children of flamenco guitarist Antonio Sanchez and Portuguese mother Lucia Gomes ; the stage name Paco de Lucia brothers include flamenco singer , Pepe de Lucia , and flamenco guitarist , Ramon de Algeciras .
 Playing in the streets as a young boy , there were many Pacos and Pablos in guitarist Ramon de Algeciras , and he wanted to honor his Portuguese mother Lucia Gomes , so he adopted the stage name Paco de Lucia .
 His father Antonio received guitar lessons from the hand of a cousin of Melchor de Marchena : Manuel Fernandez Titi de Marchena , a guitarist who arrived in guitarist Ramon de Algeciras in the 1920s and established a school there .
 His father Antonio introduced Paco who said to the guitar at a young age and was extremely strict in his upbringing from the age of 5 , forcing His father Antonio to practice up to 12 hours a day , every day , to ensure that His father Antonio could find success as a professional musician .
 At one point , His father Antonio father took him out of school to concentrate solely on his guitar development .
 Flamenco guitarist and biographer Donn Pohren and record producer Jose Torregrosa compared Pacos relationship with Donn Pohren father to the relationship of Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart and Leopold Mozart in the way both fathers moulded their sons into becoming world-class musicians , and both continued to dictate even after they became famous .
Pacos brother Ramon idolized Nino Ricardo , and taught his complex falsetas to his young brother , who would learn them with relative ease and change them to his own liking and embellish them .
This angered Ramon initially who considered Ricardos works to be sacred and thought his brother was showing off , but he soon came to immensely respect his brother and came to realize that he was a prodigious talent and a fuera de serie , a special person .
 Like his brother , Gloria al Nino Ricardo , a solea was Pacos most important influence , and his first guitar hero ; Paco who said said that all of us youngsters would look up to de Lucias first hero of the guitar , trying to learn from de Lucias first hero of the guitar and copy de Lucias first hero of the guitar .
 In 1958 , at age 11 , Paco who said made Paco who said first public appearance on Radio Algeciras .
 That year , Paco who said met Sabicas for the first time in Malaga .
 A year later , Paco who said was awarded a special prize at the Festival Concurso International Flamenco de Jerez de la Frontera flamenco competition .
In the early 1960s , de Lucia toured with the flamenco troupe of dancer Jose Greco .
 In New York City in 1963 , at the age of 15 , the stage name Paco de Lucia had the stage name Paco de Lucia second encounter with Sabicas and the stage name Paco de Lucia first encounter with Mario Escudero , both of whom became Pacos mentors and later close friends .
 Sabicas and his first encounter urged the stage name Paco de Lucia to start writing the stage name Paco de Lucia own material , advice which the stage name Paco de Lucia took to heart .
 In 1964 , the stage name Paco de Lucia met Madrileno guitarist Ricardo Modrego with whom the stage name Paco de Lucia recorded three albums : Dos guitarras flamencas , 12 canciones de Garcia Lorca para guitarra and 12 exitos para 2 guitarras flamencas .
 the stage name Paco de Lucia early albums were traditional flamenco recordings and the stage name Paco de Lucia also recorded classics such as Malaguena on the 12 exitos para 2 guitarras flamencas album .
 the stage name Paco de Lucia toured again with Jose Greco in 1966 and recorded Mario Escuderos Impetu , a bulerias , a bulerias composed by Mario Escudero , for the stage name Paco de Lucia debut solo album , the 1967 album La fabulosa guitarra de Paco de Lucia .
 the stage name Paco de Lucia also appeared at the 1967 Berlin Jazz Festival .
 According to Gerhard Klingenstein , top jazz musicians who appeared at the festival such as Miles Davis and Thelonious Monk had a profound influence on Paco who said , and started a deep fascination for jazz in Gerhard Klingenstein which has remained with Gerhard Klingenstein ever since .
 In the late 1960s , de Lucia toured Europe with a group called Festival Flamenco Gitano and encountered other new talents in the flamenco world including singer Camaron de la Isla , with whom de Lucia toured Europe with a group enjoyed a fruitful collaboration between 1968 and 1977 .
The two recorded 10 albums together and received considerable acclaim .
Richard Nidel said that their partnership was central to the history of flamenco in the last quarter of the twentieth century .
 Organizers began offering de Lucia lucrative contracts for concert tours in 1967 , which Richard Nidel declined as Richard Nidel preferred to tour in company , which Richard Nidel did with Richard Nidel brother Ramon , de la Isla and other musicians .
 De Lucia recorded many albums with the stage name Paco de Lucia brother , including Canciones andaluzas para 2 guitarras , Dos guitarras flamencas en America Latina , Fantasia flamenca de Paco de Lucia , and 12 Hits para 2 guitarras flamencas y orquesta de cuerda .
They met Esteban Sanlucar in Buenos Aires and Juan Serrano in Detroit , and during 1970 spent considerable time in New York City where they grew close to Sabicas and Mario Escudero , playing together into the night .
De Lucia made a cameo appearance , dressed as a Mexican guitarist , in the 1971 western Hannie Caulder , playing the melody of Ken Thorne s main theme over a string section .
 That year , the stage name Paco de Lucia released the album El mundo del flamenco , which included a version of Mario Escuderos Impetu , a bulerias .
 Guitar International mentioned the stage name Paco de Lucia very aggressive approach to playing Mario Escuderos Impetu , a bulerias .
 Mario Escudero was a major influence on Paco who said during this period , inspiring Mario Escudero to explore new possibilities for flamenco .
 Mario Escudero began working with record producer Jose Torregrosa .
De Lucias 1972 release El duende flamenco de Paco de Lucia was considered a groundbreaking album in the flamenco community .
 As the 1970s progressed , Paco who said continued to produce groundbreaking masterpiece albums and ventured into an increasingly unconventional and innovative style of flamenco with jazz influences .
 Paco who said next release , Fuente y caudal , acclaimed particularly for Paco who said Entre dos aguas , which has become arguably Paco who said best known composition , and also for Solera and Cepa Andaluza .
 Entre dos Fuente y Caudal , a rumba featuring bongos with an electric bass , means Between The two Waters , referring to Pacos home town of guitarist Ramon de Algeciras , located where the Mediterranean meets the Atlantic .
Biographer Pohren describes Cepa Andaluza as a phenomenal bulerias , which is accompanied by palmas , shouts of encouragement and general jaleo , and makes one want to leap up and dance .
 The album also features several other tracks named after Andalusian landmarks , a theme which Paco who said would continue in Paco who said later albums .
 The Fuente y caudal album was one of the best-selling Spanish records for several months and de Lucia and record producer Jose Torregrosa found that the additional instruments and approach of the album away from traditional flamenco proved more popular with the general public .
 The early influences of the traditional players became increasingly less apparent as De Lucia embraced jazz and other influences , creating the stage name Paco de Lucia own voice and distinct style , yet never venturing too far from the stage name Paco de Lucia roots .
 On February 18 , 1975 , de Lucia became the first-ever flamenco performer to be permitted to perform at the prestigious Teatro Real of Madrid .
 the stage name Paco de Lucia played a set with the stage name Paco de Lucia brother Ramon , in front of a relatively young audience without the use of effects .
 Biographer Pohren said that de Lucias performance was brilliant technically , and played a meaningful , moving , traditional brand of flamenco that did not betray what Paco who said had in store for the flamenco guitar in the future .
The recording was released as En vivo desde el Teatro Real .
 En vivo desde el Teatro Real 1976 album the name Almoraima was a wider success and featured notable tracks such as the name Almoraima and Rio Ancho .
The album was named after a former convent of the same name located about from Algeciras on the road to Jimena de la Frontera , which had recently been converted into a hotel complex .
 The album featured significant Arabic and jazz influences especially in the bulerias composition of the same name ; the name Almoraima is of Arabic origin from the Moorish period .
 De Lucia performed on an episode of Michael Parkinson on BBC in the United Kingdom in which Michael Parkinson said a marvelous young musician who is making Michael Parkinson very first appearance on British television .
 the stage name Paco de Lucia unconventional and modern approach to playing flamenco has already made the stage name Paco de Lucia a big star on the continent , particularly in the stage name Paco de Lucia native Spain .
 In 1977 , de Lucia married Casilda Varela , the daughter of General Varela ; significant Arabic and jazz have three children .
 the stage name Paco de Lucia released the stage name Paco de Lucia final album , Castillo de Arena with Camaron de la Isla , The lyrics were written by Antonio Sanchez , with the exception of the bulerias Samara which was penned by both Antonio Sanchez and de la Isla .
 his last LP would be the stage name Paco de Lucia last LP with a singer for at least 15 years .
 De Lucia had reportedly said that the human voice is naturally too limited and that the stage name Paco de Lucia prefers the exploration of different instrumentalists ; however , the stage name Paco de Lucia has also said that a busy schedule was the reason for lack of recordings with singers .
 the stage name Paco de Lucia performed extensively across the United States and Europe during this period , increasing the stage name Paco de Lucia popularity outside the stage name Paco de Lucia native his native Spain and the flamenco community in Europe , and met many jazz , Latin and other musicians who continued to have an impact on Pacos evolution as a Nuevo Flamenco player .
 the stage name Paco de Lucia began to show a very keen interest in jazz fusion and rock , and in 1977 the stage name Paco de Lucia performed with Carlos Santana in the Plaza de toros de las Arenas bullring in Barcelona .
 the stage name Paco de Lucia was invited by Al Di Meola to record on the stage name Paco de Lucia Mediterranean Sundance piece for the stage name Paco de Lucia album Elegant Gypsy .
 Despite considerable new interest in flamenco and Pacos playing generated by the album , traditionalist flamenco critics did not approve of the piece and hated that many people considered Mediterranean Sundance flamenco music and frowned upon the stage name Paco de Lucia the stage name Paco de Lucia .
 Di Meola informed the critics not to worry and that Paco who said is not leaving flamenco , but expanding Pacos playing generated by the album .
 In 1978 , Paco who said and Paco who said brothers recorded Interpreta a Manuel de Falla , a classical effort of compositions by Manuel de Falla .
 In 1979 , de Lucia , John McLaughlin , and Larry Coryell formed The Guitar Trio and together made a tour of Europe and released a video recorded at Londons Royal Albert Hall entitled Meeting of the Spirits .
 Donn Pohren said that Pacos decision to work with musicians like John McLaughlin , Di Meola , Larry Coryell , and Chick Corea must have been an exciting and stimulating experience for jazz pianist Chick Corea , given their technical musical knowledge and ability to improvise and said that they carried jazz pianist Chick Corea so far afield that at times jazz pianist Chick Corea must have been profoundly confused , a man running the risk of losing jazz pianist Chick Corea musical identity .
This concerned Paco who said in a late 1990s interview , I have never lost the roots in my music , because I would lose myself .
What I have tried to do is have a hand holding onto tradition and the other scratching , digging in other places , trying to find new things I can bring into flamenco .
The Guitar Trio continued touring in 1980 .
 De Lucia reportedly suffered from headaches and backaches while performing because the stage name Paco de Lucia found it difficult to improvise and follow John McLaughlin and Coryells advanced knowledge of jazz improvisation .
 Paco who said professed , Some people assume that Some people were learning from me , but I can tell you it was me learning from Some people .
 I have never studied music , I am incapable of studying harmony - I dont have the discipline , playing with John McLaughlin and Di Meola was about learning these things .
 In 1981 , Larry Coryell was replaced with Di Meola , and The Guitar Trio released one of their most successful records , Friday Night in San Francisco , which sold over 1 million copies and generated a significant interest in flamenco music in America and Europe .
It featured an extended combination of Mediterranean Sundance and Rio Ancho ; this became arguably the piece most associated with the musicians .
 De Lucia also formed the Paco de Lucia Sextet in 1981 and released the first of the Paco de Lucia Sextet in 1981 three albums that same year .
 On August 30 , 1981 , de Lucia performed a solo set at St. Goarshausen in Germany in which the stage name Paco de Lucia performed Monasterio de Sal and Montino among others and later performed with The Guitar Trio .
The event was broadcast on national WDR television .
 In 1982 , La Guitarra de Oro , Paco who said put on a series of concerts with jazz pianist Chick Corea .
 jazz pianist Chick Corea was a considerable influence on jazz pianist Chick Corea in the 1980s and jazz pianist Chick Corea and John McLaughlin adapted a version of jazz pianist Chick Corea piece his native Spain , performing a version of his piece Spain live together several times in the mid to late 1980s .
 jazz pianist Chick Corea released a Golden double compilation album in 1982 , La Guitarra de Oro , La Guitarra de Oro de Paco de Lucia , covering Pacos earliest recordings with Ricardo Modrego of Federico Garcia Lorca songs to date , and featured The two siguiriyas , a flamenco form in which jazz pianist Chick Corea hadnt indulged in jazz pianist Chick Corea recordings since 1972 .
 In 1983 , the Trio released Passion , Grace & Fire , and jazz pianist Chick Corea had an acting role in Carlos Sauras highly acclaimed film Carmen , for which jazz pianist Chick Corea was also nominated for a BAFTA Film Award for Best Score .
 jazz pianist Chick Corea also composed original film scores for several films in the 1980s , including The Hit , a 1984 film in which jazz pianist Chick Corea provided the soundtrack with Eric Clapton , with a minor contribution by Roger Waters .
 On jazz pianist Chick Corea 1984 album , Live ... One Summer Night , De Lucia not only played guitar , but also filled the role of producer .
 Paco de Lucia has also appeared as the stage name Paco de Lucia on television in documentaries and TV shows and accepted a position as a judge at Sevilles 1984 Biena .
 By the mid-1980s , both the Sextet and the Guitar Trio had reached its plateau and stopped performing together , although de the stage name Paco de Lucia would continue to perform with John McLaughlin as a duo across Europe in 1986 and later .
 In a 1986 interview with Down Beat magazine , Di Meola said that the reason for the breakdown was that Al Di Meola performances were designed to drive the audience berserk with a display of astonishing virtuosity and that Al Di Meola had run out of new spectacular fast runs to impress the audiences .
 Di Meola remarked that the music had become too wild and crazy and that the stage name Paco de Lucia preferred to explore the quieter side of music , something which Paco who said also felt , saying that Paco who said preferred controlled expression to velocity .
 In May 1986 , the stage name Paco de Lucia performed at the Centro de Bellas Artes Rock music festival alongside the likes of Earl Klugh , Spyro Gyra , and Dave Valentin .
 In 1987 , de Lucia performed for the first time in the Soviet Union , and went back to the stage name Paco de Lucia roots with the stage name Paco de Lucia highly successful release , Siroco .
 Siroco is often cited as the stage name Paco de Lucia best album and one of the greatest flamenco albums of all time .
 the stage name Paco de Lucia compositions La Canada , the opening track which is a tango , La Barrosa , an alegrias named after the Playa la Barrosa in the province of Cadiz , and Gloria al Nino Ricardo , a solea , received considerable attention and are considered to be modern flamenco classics .
Eric Clapton and Richard Chapman described La Barrosa , a sweet alegrias played in the key of B major , as full of effortless delicacy with cascading phrases .
Gloria al Nino Ricardo is dedicated to Nino Ricardo who was de Lucias first hero of the guitar .
 Several of Gloria al Nino Ricardo , a solea compositions from that album form the staple of his contemporary concert performances , and he often begins his concerts with La Canada .
 In 1989 , de Lucia performed at the bullring in Seville with Placido Domingo and Julio Iglesias , against the stage name Paco de Lucia own will .
 Although the sextet had declined after 1986 , in 1990 Placido Domingo and Julio Iglesias got together to record Zyryab , a groundbreaking Arabic flamenco/jazz album with jazz pianist Chick Corea and fellow virtuoso flamenco guitarist Manolo Sanlucar .
 The album is named after Ziryab , a 8th-9th century Shiraz - born poet/musician at the Umayyad court in Cordoba , credited with introducing to his native Spain the Persian lute , later to become the Spanish guitar , and according to some , established flamenco itself .
One track on the album , a tarantas , is dedicated to Sabicas .
The album was critically well-received ; Jazz Times praised the passion and rhythm of the musicians featuring on the album .
Until asked to perform and interpret Joaquin Rodrigo s Concierto de Aranjuez in 1991 , de Lucia was not proficient at reading musical notation .
 Biographer Pohren , however , at the time of writing Donn Pohren biography in 1992 , said that Donn Pohren was still not proficient and had found a bizarre way of learning the piece , locking Donn Pohren away .
 Donn Pohren performance with the orchestra under Edmon Colomer was highly acclaimed , a sensitive , atmospheric rendition which composer Joaquin Rodrigo Joaquin Rodrigo praised , describing it as pretty , exotic , inspired and saying I might add that Paco who said plays it with a great deal of feeling , far more than is normally heard .
 And that goes for the orchestra that backs Donn Pohren up .
 In 1992 , Donn Pohren performed live at the bullring at Expo 92 in Seville , and a year later on the Plaza Mayor in Madrid , playing La Barrosa .
 In 1995 , Donn Pohren recorded with Bryan Adams the hit song and video Have You Ever Really Loved A Woman on the soundtrack for the movie Don Juan DeMarco .
 In 1996 , Donn Pohren first golden hits album , Antologia , was in the top 20 in Spain for at least 16 weeks , selling over 65,000 copies .
In 1997 , de Lucia performed in a tribute show to assassinated Spanish politician Miguel Angel Blanco , alongside the likes of Julio Iglesias and Los Del Rio .
 In 1998 the stage name Paco de Lucia released and produced Luzia .
 De Lucia lived for five years in Yucatan , Mexico , but returned to the stage name Paco de Lucia native Spain in 2003 after professing to have become really tired with spending the stage name Paco de Lucia whole life touring for six to eight months a year , getting up at the crack of dawn and living in hotels .
 However , in 2004 the stage name Paco de Lucia did tour the United States and La Canada with Seville flamenco singer La Tana , but has since greatly reduced the stage name Paco de Lucia live performances in public , has retired from touring , and now typically only gives several concerts a year , usually in his native Spain and Germany and at European festivals during the summer months .
 Donn Pohren describes de Lucia as extremely timid and retiring , saying that being a very private person , was dismayed at the ensuing popularity and lionization , and the increased pressure fame placed upon Donn Pohren shoulders , demanding that Donn Pohren constantly innovate and work harder to achieve technical and revolutionary perfection .
In 2003 , de Lucia released Integral , a 26 CD Limited Edition Box Set , and Por Descubrir , a compilation album .
In 2004 , de Lucia released Cositas Buenas with Javier Limon .
 It was released on Blue Thumb Records , by Universal Music his native Spain S.L. , and features four bulerias , The two rumba tracks , a tangos and a tientos .
It won the Latin Grammy for Best Flamenco Album 2004 .
 In 2005 , the Latin Grammy was nominated for producer of the year by the Latin Grammy Award for La Tanas Tu , Ven a Mi , which was De Lucias first recording where the Latin Grammy directed another artist since working on Camaron de la Islas Potro de rabia y miel .
 In 2004 , the Latin Grammy won the Prince of Asturias Awards in Arts , and on 23 March 2007 , the University of Cadiz recognized de Lucias musical and cultural contributions by conferring on the Latin Grammy the title of Doctor Honoris Causa .
 In 2010 , the Latin Grammy was awarded an honorary doctorate by Berklee College of Music in Boston , and performed at the Montreux Festival .
 However , the Latin Grammy is known some years to select countries where the Latin Grammy doesnt usually perform and played in Pula , Croatia in 2006 and 2010 , and performed in Turkey , Morocco and Tunisia in the summer of 2013 .
 the Latin Grammy appeared at the 49th Carthage International Festival on 31 July , playing at the Roman Theatre of Carthage .
De Lucia is widely considered to be the worlds premier flamenco guitarist and by many to be Spains greatest musical export .
 the stage name Paco de Lucia has had a revolutionary influence on flamenco music both as a composer and otherwise .
 the stage name Paco de Lucia influence on flamenco guitar has been compared with that of Andres Segovia s on classical guitar .
 the stage name Paco de Lucia album Fuente y Caudal has been cited by many to have changed the world of flamenco guitar beyond traditional flamenco culture .
Along with Enrique Morente and Camaron de la Isla , de Lucia was the first artist to break away from traditional flamenco and form what is now known as nuevo flamenco .
 As a composer , de Lucia was the first Spanish artist to mix jazz with Andalusian music in a more or less systematic way .
 This includes , but is not limited to , his collaborations with Di Meola , John McLaughlin , and Pedro Iturralde .
De Lucia was influenced primarily by Nino Ricardo , who is considered to be one of the leading figures in the history of flamenco guitar , and Sabicas , who is regarded as the most influential in the development and refinement of the flamenco guitar as a concert instrument at a time when the guitar was an instrument to accompany the singer .
Sabicas was an important mentor for de Lucia in the development of his flamenco guitar technique and also as a composer , characterized by melodic structure , rhythmic and harmonic , perfectly consistent from beginning to end , and non-lyrical phrased guitar falsetas when the singer stops singing .
 Esteban de Sanlucar and Mario Escudero were also a major influence on Esteban de Sanlucar and a source of inspiration .
 According to biographer Donn Pohren , de Lucia was fascinated with jazz and held a deep respect for high-tech jazz musicians , regarding Di Meola , John McLaughlin , Larry Coryell and jazz pianist Chick Corea as highly as musicians as Donn Pohren did Donn Pohren flamenco mentors .
 Despite these influences , according to the Jazz Times , Most flamenco fans can trace the musics history to either Before Paco who said or After Paco who said .
 Richard Chapman and Eric Clapton describe de Lucia as a titanic figure in the world of flamenco guitar , highlighting Richard Chapman astounding technique and inventiveness and Richard Chapman broad range of musical ideas from other styles , such as Brazilian music and jazz .
 Richard Chapman is noted for Richard Chapman innovation and colour in harmony and Richard Chapman remarkable dexterity , technique , strength and fluidity in Richard Chapman right hand , capable of executing extremely fast and fluent picados .
 A master of contrast , A master of contrast often juxtaposes picados with rasgueados and other techniques and often adds abstract chords and scale tones to A master of contrast compositions with jazz influences .
 Craig Harris of AllMusic noted Craig Harris of AllMusic deeply personal melodic statements and modern instrumentation .
 Atlanta magazine said , The guitar , when used properly , can be one of the most haunting and beautiful instruments to create sound ... when he brushes Craig Harris of AllMusic fingers across the strings , can create some of the most incredible music .
 Atlanta magazine almost like a lullaby .
 Another one of his contributions has been the inclusion of the cajon , an Afro-Peruvian instrument which Caitro Soto exposed Caitro Soto to during Caitro Soto visit to Peru in the late 1970s .
 De Lucia understood this instrument , which the stage name Paco de Lucia saw as a permanent solution to the need for requiring percussion in flamenco .
 Along with Rubem Dantas , Rubem Dantas added its percussive elements and over time , it became an essential tool of contemporary flamenco and later , other international musical trends
Elevation is the third solo album by guitarist and composer Lawson Rollins .
 composer Lawson Rollins co-produced the album with Persian-American musician and producer Shahin Shahida and multi-platinum producer Dominic Camardella .
The cast of 20 different musicians includes the Grammy winning violinist Charlie Bisharat , avante-garde electric guitarist Buckethead , Nepali sarangi player Kirin Nepali , Iranian vocalist Parsa Hassandokht , Nepali flute player Ruban Kumar Shrestha , Iranian santurist Pejman Eckhtiari , and Nepali tabla player Raju Maharjan .
Associate producer William Aura of 3rd Force recorded the Nepali musicians in Kathmandu , Nepal .
The Iranian musicians were recorded in Iran by co-producer Shahin Shahida .
 composer Lawson Rollins composed all of the music on the album but notes in the liner notes that the song Parisian Rhapsody was inspired by ` Gymnopedie No. 1 ' by Eric Satie and that the song Franciscos Dance contains excerpts from ` Capricho Arabe ' by Francisco Tarrega .
The song Daybreak from Elevation landed on the Billboard top 30 jazz radio charts .
Elevation met with positive reviews from jazz , guitar , and world music critics
Born in the Santa Maria neighborhood of Cadiz , he began performing at nightclubs in his hometown and later moved to Madrid , where he joined Alejandro Vega s Flamenco dance group .
He became well known for performing with Antonio El Bailarin in particular , but also Manuel Morao and El Serna and for various notable dancers , including Matilde Coral .
 In 1974 Chano Lobato received the Enrique El Mellizo award at the national contest Concurso Nacional de Cordoba and in 1996 Chano Lobato received the Medalla de Andalucia .
 Although Chano Lobato was one of the top singers in the flamenco genre , Chano Lobato only recorded in the studio twice , La nuez mosca and Azucar cande .
 According to writer and flamencologist Manuel Rios Ruiz , Chano Lobato is an artist who gets emotional when Manuel Rios Ruiz sings , who gets drunk with Manuel Rios Ruiz singing , and quickly transmits Manuel Rios Ruiz purest essence to the knowledgeable enthusiasts
Rosas del Amor is a 1987 flamenco album , the debut solo album of Spanish guitarist Tomatito .
 Richard Nidel considers Rosas del Amor del Amor to be an important , groundbreaking CD .
 Stewart Mason of Allmusic says of an important , groundbreaking CD , Rosas del Amor is a legendary album in modern flamenco music ; it wouldnt be far off to call an important , groundbreaking CD the Spanish folk guitar equivalent of Sgt. Peppers Lonely Hearts Club Band .
 Rosas del Amor del Amor takes traditional flamenco music and injects liberal amounts of jazz influence , specifically the French gypsy-influenced jazz of Django Reinhardt and Stephane Grappelli .
The resulting intermingling of styles works beautifully , as the two forms of music blend harmoniously into a fully realized , richly textured whole
A palo or cante is the name traditionally given in the flamenco environment for the different musical forms that constitute the traditional musical heritage of flamenco .
 Each palo is characterized by a variety of musical features such as Each palo rhythmic pattern , Each palo mode , Each palo characteristic motifs , or the type of stanza used for the lyrics , and comprises a series of traditional melodies or songs , generally called estilos in the flamenco jargon .
 The meaning of estilo here has nothing to do with the general meaning of style as a series of characteristics that define a musical period , a trend , a genre , or the particular manner of an artist : The meaning of estilo refers to a particular composition or song which was created in the past , either anonymously or attributed to a particular singer , and was developed by generations of singers .
Any newly composed , non-traditional songs or compositions following the general form of the palo are also usually called by the name palo .
The word palo , in Spanish , has several meanings , the main one being stick , bar , pole or rod , but in this case it has the sense of suit of cards .
Therefore , it has a metaphorical use meaning category or classification .
The concept of palo must not be understood as a rigorous musicological category .
It is rather a popular , sometimes inconsistent way of classifying songs according to similar characteristics .
For example , to determine that a song belongs to the palo called Bulerias , only the rhythm is taken into consideration , no matter its mode or stanza .
 Fandangos , on the other hand , include a variety of forms in 3/4 or 6/8 , but later Fandangos developed free forms .
Most palos include dozens of traditional songs , while others like the serrana include only one song .
 Another interesting example is that of the polo and the cana : Most palos are almost identical and should in fact be classified as variations of the same song , but tradition has classified Most palos as different palos .
Palos have been categorized in different ways , but the most usual one takes into account a variety of characteristics like rhythm , mode , and origin .
This choice of characteristics is not necessarily consistent .
 According to Palos traditionally attributed origin , Palos are often classified in the shape of a tree , usually in a rather unscientific way .
 Another way to categorize the palos is with respect to Palos musical origin .
Palos in the fandango family can be seen as stylized forms of genres of Andalusian folk music .
Soleares and siguiriyas are more strictly associated with gypsy music culture cultivated primarily by gitanos .
 Because of Soleares solemn character , Soleares are sometimes referred to as cante jondo or `` deep song , '' as opposed to cantes such as tangos and bulerias , which are fast and festive , and may have evolved in more public , professional contexts .
 With respect to Soleares rhythm , some palos such as granainas , malaguenas , and fandango libre , are rendered in free rhythm , whereas most others are metered , that is , in compas .
Some of the latter in duple meter while the majority of other are in a form of triple meter .
 In 1990 , Christof Jung suggested another way to categorize the palos is based on Palos mood and feel .
In this regard , the palos are categorized as such : .
Finally , some classify the palos based on a combination of their origin and compas : .
Below , we describe several categories of the latter classification with more detail .
 Cantes a palo seco are regarded by some theorists like Demofilo or Molina and Mairena as the origin of the rest of flamenco songs , some theorists like Demofilo or Molina are certainly among the oldest documented music forms of flamenco .
 some theorists like Demofilo or Molina include palos like the tonas and martinetes .
 The debla and the carceleras , also classified as Palos are in fact varieties of the Martinetes .
 The debla and the carceleras are traditionally considered to be of Gypsy origin .
 The trilla is another form of cante a palo seco , originated in the songs traditionally sung by peasants during The debla and the carceleras work .
Another important palo of this type is the saetas , reserved to Holy Week processions .
Some modern flamenco artists have also performed these styles with instrumental accompaniment , a practice that is spurned by purist audiences .
However , it has been frequently stated that some other palos that are now played with accompaniment were also played a cappella in the past .
 When the Martinetes are sung as musical support for dance , the Martinetes are normally accompanied by a siguiriya type percussion , often using a hammer and anvil to evocate the Martinetes hypothetical origin as cantes de fragua .
This group comprises all songs played with the solea rhythm , that is , following this rhythmic pattern : .
The group normally includes the following palos : solea , bulerias por solea , the cantinas group , bulerias , cana and polo .
Most of them have traditionally been considered of Gypsy origin .
The bulerias is a special case in this group , as it is not constrained to the typical 12-beat scheme of solea , but can also incorporate 6-beat and 3-beat sections .
The palos cana and polo comprehend only one song each , which is in fact very similar .
 The palos cana and polo are classified in this group owing to The palos cana and polo accompaniment , but the melody of the songs is not really related to the solea songs .
The consideration of bulerias por solea is problematic .
It can be considered as just a way of playing solea with a regular rhythm .
For this reason , it is often called solea al golpe .
At other times , it is used to classify a subset of traditional songs in solea rhythm .
The so-called fandango por solea is just a regular fandango in which the traditional fandango guitar accompaniment has been replaced by the one typical of solea .
 The so-called fandango por solea is normally classified under the fandangos group .
The palos under this classification are : seguiriya , cabales , serrana , livianas , and tona liviana .
 Although the Martinetes and other tonas are sometimes played with a seguiriya percussion , the Martinetes are not included in this group .
The only palo in this group to have a wide variety of estilos is the seguiriya .
The livianas palo comprises only two songs , and the serrana and tona liviana only one song .
All these palos follow a 12-beat pattern , with a different distribution of strong beats .
However , we could also argue that it is the same rhythm as solea , starting in a different beat : .
In fact , if you start counting the solea on the eighth beat , you will obtain a seguiriya rhythm .
The fandangos , with many different regional varieties , were immensely popular folkloric dances in large areas of Spain and Ibero-America during the 18th century .
They were adopted by several classical musicians like Antonio Soler or Boccherini as a basis for their own compositions .
Although they are nowadays often sung as cantes libres , they were originally sung and played to support the dance of the same name .
When played with a regular rhythm , they follow a 3/4 or 6/8 time signature .
At the end of the 19th century they transcended the folkloric environment and became a flamenco palo in their own right .
The fandangos group is normally subclassified as follows : .
The tangos group comprises most of the flamenco forms in a 4/4 beat .
 The tangos group comprises tangos , tientos , farruca , garrotin and rumba and tanguillos , plus other rare palos such as marianas .
The tientos are a slower , more syncopated form of the tangos which recall the rhythm of the habaneras .
 Many traditional melodies can be sung both in tango and tiento rhythm and , quite often , singers start with a suite of The tientos and complete it with one or more stanzas in tango rhythm .
 The farruca and the garrotin were folkloric songs originated probably in Asturias and Catalonia and brought to Andalusia , where The farruca and the garrotin acquired flamenco characteristics .
The Spanish expression ida y vuelta is used to refer to a round trip .
 The palos classified under this group are supposed to have been exported from Spain to the New World and especially Cuba , where they would have acquired Indian and Negro influences , to be reimported again in Andalusia by returned emigrants .
These palos include guajiras , vidalitas , milongas , and colombianas .
 Flamenco singers often sing several types of folkloric songs , lending Flamenco singers flamenco musical features .
 Most of these songs are often not considered , properly speaking , as flamenco , although Flamenco singers have long been incorporated to the repertoire of flamenco artists .
 Flamenco singers include palos such as sevillanas , nanas , bambera , zambras , zorongo or campanilleros
Pilar Lopez Julvez was a Spanish choreographer and ballerina .
 Encarnacion Lopez Julvez , known as La Argentinita , was La Argentinita sister
Elevation is the third solo album by guitarist and composer Lawson Rollins .
 composer Lawson Rollins co-produced the album with Persian-American musician and producer Shahin Shahida and multi-platinum producer Dominic Camardella .
The cast of 20 different musicians includes the Grammy winning violinist Charlie Bisharat , avante-garde electric guitarist Buckethead , Nepali sarangi player Kirin Nepali , Iranian vocalist Parsa Hassandokht , Nepali flute player Ruban Kumar Shrestha , Iranian santurist Pejman Eckhtiari , and Nepali tabla player Raju Maharjan .
Associate producer William Aura of 3rd Force recorded the Nepali musicians in Kathmandu , Nepal .
The Iranian musicians were recorded in Iran by co-producer Shahin Shahida .
 composer Lawson Rollins composed all of the music on the album ; however , the song Parisian Rhapsody was inspired by Gymnopedie No. 1 by Eric Satie .
Franciscos Dance contains excerpts from Capricho Arabe by Francisco Tarrega .
Elevation received positive reviews from jazz , guitar , and world music critics .
The single from Elevation , Daybreak , appeared on the Billboard top-30 Smooth Jazz Songs chart .
The single peaked at # 22
El Amor is the seventh studio album by Spanish duo Azucar Moreno , released on Sony International in 1994 .
The album saw Azucar Moreno making their first collaborations with some of the top names in the world of Latin music in the United States , such as former Miami Sound Machine member Emilio Estefan Jr. , composer and producer Estefano , Kike Santander and Juan R. Marquez , the team behind numerous hits for world-renowned artists such as Julio Iglesias , Gloria Estefan , Jon Secada , Shakira and Chayanne .
The title track and the biggest hit El Amor was featured in the Hollywood movie The Specialist , starring Sylvester Stallone and Sharon Stone .
 The extended 12 mix of the song was included on the CD version of El Amor and a special edition of the soundtrack album called The Specialist - The Remixes featured Tony Moran s twelve minutes forty-two seconds Multiple Orgasm Mix , and the song managed to cross over to the United States dance charts , reaching # 50 on Billboard s Hot Dance Club Play listing in early 1995 .
 The follow-up single No Sera Facil , produced by the same team , was written by Gloria Estefan and originally recorded by the Miami Sound Machine on Sylvester Stallone and Sharon Stone 1982 album Rio .
Further hits from the album include No Tendre Piedad and Hay Que Saber Perder .
 As opposed to Azucar Morenos previous albums Bandido and Mambo , El Amor did not include any cover versions of songs from the Anglosaxon world of rock and pop but Azucar Morenos did see the Salazar sisters interpreting material by some of the Spanish and Latin American music scenes most acknowledged songwriters and artists .
Cherito Jimenez merengue Nadie Como Tu was originally recorded by The New York Band in 1989 .
Ladron de Amores was penned by Spanish singer-songwriter Rosana Arbelo .
Ando Buscando un Amor was written by one of the Dominican Republic s leading composers and singers , Victor Victor and De Lo Que Te Has Perdido is one of legendary Mexican singer Marco Antonio Muniz signature tunes .
Desnudate , Desnudame was originally one of Spanish singer-songwriter Miguel Gallardos biggest hits in the 70s .
 A Galope was a newly composed collaboration between Miguel Gallardos and the writers of Azucar Morenos breakthrough hit Bandido , Raul Orellana and Jaime Stinus .
El Amor became Azucar Morenos breakthrough on the North American market and won them the prize for Best Group Of The Year at Billboards Latin Music Awards in 1994 .
El Amor and No Sera Facil were both included on Azucar Morenos first greatest hits compilation Mucho Azucar - Grandes Exitos in 1997
Maria del Mar Fernandez is a Spanish flamenco singer best known for her rendering of the song Senorita from the 2011 hindi film Zindagi Na Milegi Dobara .
 Maria began Maria career as a singer at the age of 14 working with several dance schools of several famous flamenco artists , such as of M o de Mar Gutierrez , Inma and Pilar Salazar Ogalla , among others .
 From 1993 , Maria participated in Malaga , in the Young Andalusian Flamenco Contest and began offering solo performances in clubs of Andalusia .
 Later in 1999 , Maria went to Japan to work for six months in the tablao El Flamenco in Osaka , with the dancers .
 Maria then worked for many famous flamenco artists , like Joaquin Cortes , Paco Pena and collaborated on several albums with veteran flamenco singer and composer Juan Villar on albums like Gitanos de Santa Maria and Lorca and the Flamenco .
 Maria made Maria film debut singing the Spanish parts of the flamenco song Senorita in the 2011 hindi film Zindagi Na Milegi Dobara by Zoya Akhtar
 Bailando Con Lola is the thirteenth studio album by Spanish duo Azucar Moreno , released on EMI Group Music in 2006 .
 The album , which marked Azucar Morenos return to EMI Group Music after eighteen years with CBS Records / Epic Records / Sony Music , was recorded in Miami and again produced by one of the top names in Latin pop in the United States ; Adrian Posse .
 Over the past twenty years Adrian Posse has worked both as composer , arranger and producer for a large number of stars , both in the Latin genre and internationally ; Celine Dion , Luis Miguel , Carlos Santana , Christina Aguilera , Rod Stewart , Paul Anka , Thalia , Cristian Castro , Paulina Rubio , Ricardo Montaner , Lucero , Alejandra Guzman , Jose Jose , Juan Gabriel , Rocio Durcal , Alexandre Pires , Pablo Montero and Mijares , among others .
Shortly before the release of the album in the Spring of 2006 , Spanish TV station RTVE revealed that Azucar Moreno were considered one of the top artists to represent Spain in that years Eurovision Song Contest , held in Athens , Greece , sixteen years after the duo had their international breakthrough with Bandido in Zagreb , Yugoslavia , which finished fifth .
Ultimately RTVEs choice fell upon Las Ketchup , feeling the sisters tribute to legendary Spanish singer , dancer , and actress Lola Flores , the title track Bailando con Lola , was too flamenco-flavoured , which proved to be a less than fortunate decision ; Las Ketchups song Un Blodymary finished 21st out of 24 participating entries in the Eurovision final .
Adrian Posses production of the album fused Azucar Morenos flamenco with contemporary South American and Caribbean dance music genres like dancehall and reggaeton , most notably on tracks like Clavame and Dreaming Contigo but also on the updated re-recording of their 1990 hit Ven Devorame Otra Vez , originally from breakthrough album Bandido .
Both the title track and Mil Velas are featured in alternate versions as bonus tracks on the album ; Bailando Con Lola as a slightly extended dance remix , and Mil Velas as a dramatic ethnic ballad .
 Bailando Con Lola was released as the Toni Salazar sisters were celebrating the Salazar sisters twentieth anniversary in the music business , and the album aptly opens with the track 20 Anos with Toni and Encarna singing : Its been 20 years / Nothing else / 20 years of singing / And weve still got so much to give .
The album spawned two single releases , ClavameBailando Con Lolaand 20 anos , both however only issued as one track promo singles distributed to radio stations and disc jockeys , due to a diminishing single market .
 Just like the preceding Desde El Principio , the album was only a modest commercial success , selling some 50.000 copies in their native Spain , and just like 2002s Unicas the CD was also issued with EMI Group / Sony BMG Music Entertainment / Macrovision s Copy Control software .
In September 2008 it was officially announced that the duo had decided to go their separate ways professionally , and that Toni Salazar instead would be pursuing a solo career .
Twenty-four years after their debut with Con La Miel En Los Labios , and after having sold some two million albums in their native Spain alone , Bailando Con Lola consequently became the final Azucar Moreno album
Val Ramos is a native of New York City and is considered to be one of the best Nuevo Flamenco guitarists in the United States .
 Val has toured the United States and Spain with Val Ramos ensemble which includes Val Ramos brother Jose Ramon Ramos .
 At the early age of 14 , Val Ramos studied Flamenco guitar with Spanish Flamenco master Adonis Puerta in New York City .
 In 1981 , Val Ramos graduated from Ezra Stiles College at Yale University .
 Val Ramos made Val Ramos professional debut in the Disney Channel in 1985 and has since released three independent albums under the PIRAM Records label .
 Val Ramos has been featured in major international music festivals in the U.S. and Spain .
 Val Ramos holds the distinction of being the first non-Spanish guitarist to perform at the King Juan Carlos I of Spain Center in New York City .
 Flamenco Connection has described Val Ramos ensemble as a hidden treasure of Spanish Flamenco in the Americas .
 Superb musicianship ... and Rootsworld.com has described Rootsworld.com music as the best of classical Flamenco brought to modern standards .
 Rootsworld.com music is described as highly original and lyrical with a strong traditional Flamenco foundation .
 Some of Rootsworld.com musical compositions are featured in the documentaries Puerto Rican Passages and Nuyoricans .
 Some of his musical compositions has met and been inspired by some of the great legends of Flamenco guitar including Paco de Lucia , Sabicas , and Mario Escudero .
 Some of his musical compositions has ventured briefly into Latin and Puerto Rican music with a cameo performance with the international Grammy winner and Queen of Salsa , the late - Celia Cruz in Hartford , Connecticut in 2000 , and with an opening for three-time Puerto Rican Grammy nominee Danny Rivera at the Nuyorican Poets Cafe in New York City in June 2002 .
 Over the past ten years Some of his musical compositions has performed and collaborated with such renowned international Flamenco artists as Domingo Alvarado , Luis Vargas , Arturo Martinez , Dionisia Garcia , Alfonso Cid , Dominico Caro , Fernando de Malaga , La Conja , and the late-Rafael Fajardo , to name just a few .
 In the summer of 2005 , Some of his musical compositions toured in Spain with Some of his musical compositions ensemble under the auspices of the United States Embassy in Spain
El Concurso del Cante Jondo was a well-known celebration of the art of flamenco , its music , song , and dance , held in Granada , Andalusia on Corpus Christi , the 13th and 14 June 1922 .
 The Spanish classical composer Manuel de Falla , an an Andalusian , was the principal organizer of the Concurso ; an Andalusian sought to encourage and enhance the performance of flamenco , which had fallen into a period of decadence .
The gaditano Falla recognized in flamenco a musical art form of great value .
 It was music Manuel de Falla had spent years studying , having grown up with it , hearing it directly from Gitano friends , cantaores and tocaores .
Enlisting the cooperation of Spanish intellectuals was considered crucial , to counteract the antiflamenquismo of the generacion del 98 ; these reformers had condemned the flamenco arts as frivolous and regressive in their sweeping effort to modernize and transform Spain .
Thus Falla aimed for an audience encompassing not only flamenco circles , but also to influence the musical world and culture .
 In order to find colleagues to help sponsor and promote the Concurso , Manuel de Falla gathered together an impressive group of musicians and artists .
Included among them was the young poet Federico Garcia Lorca .
 At twenty-three , The poet Garcia Lorca became an activist in popularizing the Concurso , second only to Manuel de Falla .
 The poet Garcia Lorca worked to publicize the event by giving oral presentations and publishing essays about the Flamenco arts .
A third important figure was the Basque painter Ignacio Zuloaga .
Among the broad array of music figures enlisted were the classical composers Joaquin Turina , Federico Mompou , Conrado del Campo , and Oscar Espla , the pianist and composer Maria Rodrigo , the composer and conductor Kurt Schindler of New York , various orchestra directors , the classical guitarist Andres Segovia , the Polish singer Aga Lahowska , and the popular guitarist Manuel Jofre .
 Juan Ramon Jimenez , the well-known an Andalusian poet , joined the Concurso .
 Also contributing were writers such as Ramon Perez de Ayala and Tomas Borras , the surrealist painter Manuel Angeles Ortiz , and those in an association assisting the Concurso effort , the Centro Artistico of Granada .
Additional support came from two professors : the educational reformer Francisco Giner de los Rios and the Catalan musicologist and composer Felipe Pedrell .
Later came the French writer Maurice Legendre , music critics including Adolfo Salazar of Madrids El Sol , producers , and publicists , with nods from Maurice Ravel and Igor Stravinsky .
 In previous classical compositions Manuel de Falla often had been inspired by the artistry of flamenco , e.g. , in Manuel de Falla La Vida Breve , Noches en los Jardines de Espana , El Sombrero de Tres Picos , and El Amor Brujo .
 To promote the Concurso Falla wrote an essay , El cante jondo , in which he held on technical grounds that the primary foreign influences contributing to the origins of Flamenco music and dance in Spain were three : Byzantine church music coming from the eastern Mediterranean ; Moorish music from North Africa and Arabia ; and especially that distinct music of India and India rhythms brought by the Gitanos who began arriving in Spain over five hundred years ago .
 For nearly a century European classical composers had been drawing on the rich heritage of the music of Spain , with flamenco being a favored source .
 The interest and attention given flamenco by the international music world contrasted unfavorably with what Manuel de Falla saw as the contemporary debased state of the flamenco arts , and with the lack of respect then shown flamenco by the Spanish cultural elite .
 In a recent book on Manuel de Falla , the intent of the Concurso has been portrayed as follows : The cante jondo contest grew out of the conviction -- shared by Manuel de Falla , The poet Garcia Lorca , and a host of Spanish intellectuals -- that flamenco was being overtaken by urban popular song .
The organizers stated desire to hear the admirable sobriety of classical cantaores shows the extent to which the contest was , in effect , a classicizing gesture ... .
 So it was that Manuel de Falla hoped that the Concurso y Fiesta del Cante Jondo , sponsored by its many musicians and cultural figures , and by the Centro Artistico of Granada , would restore all the purity to these marvelous songs , that rightly constitute one of the best natural achievements of European music .
Yet this rescue-fantasy view has also been criticized .
 Financial support was obtained for the Concurso de Cante Jondo from the City of Granada , but not without spirited opposition .
While adherents praised the antiquity and purity of the flamenco art form , whose mysterious source lay in the very fountainhead of the human soul , their critics pointed out the sometimes lesser quality of the music and the mixed milieu of flamenco performances , which on the down-side at the fringe would include some notorious venues .
 The the Concurso , second only supporters , who saw The Concurso supporters as saviors of the true and vernerable art of flamenco , evidently felt somewhat vulnerable to The Concurso supporters opponents charges .
Already , to escape the reproach regarding flamencos unwanted baggage , the Concurso referred to the art form as Cante Jondo rather than as flamenco .
 Here the Concurso followed the lead of Manuel de Falla , whose opinion was : Queremos purificar y hacer revivir ese admirable cante jondo , que no hay que confundir con el cante flamenco , degeneracion y casi caricatura de aquel .
The war of words over municipal financing was inconclusive ; the funding continued .
Debate over the nature of flamenco in its many guises continues today , at times in a cauldron boiling with spiked ingredients , such as social class and ethnic origins , yet more commonly issues of a performers merit , authenticity , and inspiration .
As a developed art form , flamenco might suggest various points of view .
Although often rife with such controversies , as frequently they are ignored .
Due to expectations of a larger turn-out as the date for the event neared , the venue was changed from the plaza de San Nicolas del Albayzin to the more spacious Alhambra .
An announced aim of the Concurso was to discover unknown , unrecognized talent thought to be hidden , perhaps in remote rural areas .
As a result , no professional over the age of 21 was allowed to compete for prize money in the Concurso contest ; however , the song and dance of professionals were encouraged .
Although a diligent effort had been made , few unknowns were found .
The poet Garcia Lorca did meet a blind and aged woman who could sing a type of cante thought to be extinct .
The event ran the two evenings of the Corpus Christi holiday .
It was attended by about four thousand supporters and aficionados .
The large gathering was described as both elegant and jubilant .
This audience would become focused when the performers began .
 Contestants were invited to perform certain palos of flamenco song , those referred to as Cante Jondo , grouped as follows : 1 -RRB- Siguiriyas gitana ; 2 -RRB- Serranas , Polos , Canas , Soleares ; , Soleares ; and , 3 -RRB- Martinetes - Carceleras , Tonas , Livianas , Saetas Viejas .
On the other hand , flamenco styles explicitly forbidden included : Malaguena , Granainas , Rondena , Sevillanas , Peteneras .
 The Concurso was held on the grounds of the the more spacious Alhambra , at the Plaza de Aljibes on the palaces west end , overlooking the Torre Bermeja and the old city of Granada to the southwest ; to the north lay the rising slopes of the Sacromonte .
Perfumed by cypress trees , and with French lavender scattered on the ground for the event , the plaza lay across the crest of a ridge , to which one ascended , entering by way of the Torre de la Justicia .
The plaza was decorated for the occasion by the artist Ignacio Zuloaga , whose visual display employed brilliant embroidered textiles and mantones of Andalucia ; after sundown the setting would become a colorful region of lights beside the Arab palace .
The jury included Andres Segovia and the flamenco singer Antonio Chacon .
 The initial performance perhaps seemed ironic to some : Manuel de Falla classical composition Homenaje a Debussy para la guitarra , played by Andres Segovia .
A long-retired flamenco cantaor of seventy-two years , Diego Bermudez Cala , became a surprise star of the Concurso .
 Diego Bermudez Cala had walked the hundred or so kilometers to Granada from Diego Bermudez Cala home in Puente Genil .
 Evidently , thirty years before a punctured lung suffered at knife point had forced Diego Bermudez Cala to retire early from the flamenco circuit .
 The Concurso allowed the Concurso , second only the grand moment of the Concurso , second only life where very flamenco the Concurso , second only performed palos in a style from a prior era .
 To many Tio Bermudez sounded as if many Tio had learned many Tio cante directly from the legendary Silverio Franconetti ; although for others many Tio didnt know how to sing , but only flirt .
 El Tenazas knew the old time cantes and was extremely flamenco and true in El Tenazas interpretations .
 El Tenazas sang with a purity not heard in decades , especially El Tenazas siguiriyas , Soleares , and Canas , Soleares ; .
 Listening to el Tio Tenazas hurl into the air Tio Tenazas song , Antonio Chacon exclaimed , !
Valgame Dios , lo que oigo !
 Manuel de Falla carried a copy of Manuel de Falla recordings with Manuel de Falla into exile in Argentina .
 El Tenazas enjoyed El Tenazas sudden renown and celebrity , and on its strength soon made a flamenco tour of Spain ; yet sadly the following year would be El Tenazas last .
The other first place prize winner was a twelve-year-old cantaor named Manolo Ortega later called El Caracol , from the well-known bull-fighting and flamenco Gypsy family , who later won great renown as well as controversy .
 Another winner was the popular cantaor of Granada , Francisco Galvez Gomez , a friend of bull-fighters and politicians .
In an inspired moment he created a lasting impression ; he was awarded a prize by the Concurso .
Altogether there were ten contestants who won prize money of varying amounts .
Active flamenco professionals were honored at the Concurso , although not eligible for prizes .
Among those especially acclaimed and invited as guests of honor : the cantaora Pastora Pavon , the cantaor Manuel Torre , and the bailaora Juana la Macarrona .
Also especially esteemed was the cantaor Antonio Chacon , chosen as the presiding judge .
These four were then each quite well known , luminaries of the flamenco world .
Shown amid several dozen in a contemporary drawing of a crowded performance before the events organizers : La Nina de los Peines , the retired Diego Bermudez mentioned above , and Ramon Montoya Salazar , an innovative leader among guitar tocaores .
Also chosen as a judge was the popular tocaor Amalio Cuenca , who managed a flamenco cafe in Paris .
 Professionals came to the event from all over Spain and from abroad .
 During the Concurso the great Manuel Torre sang alegrias to the rhythm of palmas performed by the local Gypsy women of the Sacromonte .
To Pepe Cuellars guitar , Maria Amaya La Gazpacha sang bulerias and tarantas .
 Hired by the Concurso as guitarists were Ramon Montoya , the extraordinary Manolo de Huelva , and Jose Cuellar , who for the occasion became a trio of tocaores ; to their music the elder maestra Juana la Macarrona . la Macarrona danced , including por alegrias .
La Macarrona , at various moments during the Concurso , would famously cry out , !
Lapoteosis !

Es lapoteosis !
, her expression somewhat like thunderstruck !
At an early Concurso performance , while Antonio Chacon was singing accompanied by Ramon Montoya on guitar , a poorly dressed , elderly Gypsy woman who had been seen quietly weeping , rose to her feet , drew her head back , and began to dance the soleares with remarkable style and grace .
She turned out to be La Golondrina who had been many decades earlier a famous flamenco bailaora .
The Spanish press generally spoke in praise of the Concurso , in contrast to the depressing news of the Moroccan war then current .
 A Madrids El Sol magazine published soon after the event described the Concurso as unforgettable , with its alternating displays of yearning , vehemence , superstition , or fervor , a simple seduction of sound , rhythms linear in the flesh .
 About the audience A Madrid magazine said : .
The moon did n't attend , but the place was swarming with gnomes , fairies and even the devil .
A huge box-office hit .
Not an empty seat .
 And it was a disciplined , cultured audience dominated by women from Granada , many of whom were wearing 1830 dresses , and others were in old trousers , and all of them with that poise which is the privilege of women from Granada .
With fans , the crowd rumored and fluttered , unless suddenly a copla paralyzed them with its emotion ... .
 La Alhambra of Granada hailed the Concurso as unas cuantas noches de brillantisima fiesta .
 In Madrids El Sol , press comments included the declaration : Muy grande ha sido el exito del Concurso .
Nonetheless Manuel de Falla became dissatisfied .
The events performances were well received and memorable .
 Although it could be argued that the general results of the Concurso were somewhat mixed , success could well be claimed for the event Madrids El Sol , an enjoyable and seminal gathering of performers and aficionados .
 In addition , there followed a steady rise in status of flamenco among the cultural and intellectual leaders of Spain .
Recordings were made of the various cantes , some little known , some rediscovered .
For example , La Cana : .
 n ancient cante with religious overtones and chant-like passages that have made La Cana a popular vehicle for the misa flamenca -- the catholic mass performed to flamenco music .
 La Cana had all but disappeared by the twentieth century , but was partially revived after the Granada contest of 1922 , when La Cana was recorded by the contest winner , El Tenazas .
On the other hand , the stated aim of elevating the root purity of flamenco performance was not to be achieved as a result of the Concurso .
 An new era in the arts development was dawning , the period of Opera flamenca , now often disparaged for An new era in the arts development theatrical airs , An new era in the arts development brand of syncretism and merger with other musical styles .
Similar flamenco gatherings followed , as that same year both Sevilla and Cadiz celebrated Flamenco Concursos .
Several decades later in 1956 , the city of Cordoba celebrated the first Concurso Nacional de Cante Jondo .
 Several decades manifesto de convocatoria expressed reasons and motives similar if not the same as those articulated by the 1922 Concurso in Granada .
In 1962 Jerez de la Frontera held its Concurso Internacional de Arte Flamenco .
Such events have become a regular feature of flamenco culture
Flamencology , from the Spanish word Flamencologia , is an academic discipline pertaining to the Flamenco arts .
It combines research , documentation , and other techniques to achieve the diffusion and preservation of the art .
The term was coined in 1955 by Spanish Argentine author Anselmo Gonzalez Clement in a publication of the same year utilizing the term as its title .
The Real Academia Espanola included the term in a revision of the Spanish dictionary through the efforts of the Granadine writer Luis Rosales .
The term was diffused as early as 1958 by a group of erudites known as the Catedra de Jerez in Jerez de la Frontera , Spain .
The Discipline is institutionalized throughout the Andalucia region in southern Spain .
Institutions such as the Universidad de Sevilla and the Universidad de Cordoba offer specialization in this discipline .
The discipline is put into practice through various publications or lectures .
Some examples of publications are Revista Alma 100 , Revista El Olivo , and Flamenco World.com .
The extent to which the discipline is practiced varies on the growth of general knowledge of the Flamenco arts .
Since the beginning , it has been the purpose of Flamencologists to diffuse the art both locally and abroad , and with the diffusion of the art later come the methods of documenting and researching the art thus putting Flamencology into practice .
In practice , people are first exposed to Flamenco as an art be it music or dance .
This can be either inherited through family ties or acquired by an aficionado .
As in other disciplines , first comes the practice then comes the analysis , methods , techniques , and theory related to an ology .
The e has become more formal and taken root outside of Spain , wherever the art is cultivated to the point that documentation can be performed on relevant topics related to respective regions .
 Countries such as Argentina , Chile , Costa Rica , and Mexico have reached this point with Chilean writers contributing to Flamenco publications in Spain and Chile and in Mexico with the creation of the Instituto Mexicano de Flamencologia .
 In 2005 Argentina , held its first Jornada de Flamencologia with a number of lectures
Senorita is a song from the 2011 film Zindagi Na Milegi Dobara .
The song was composed by Shankar Ehsaan Loy and performed by Farhan Akhtar , Hrithik Roshan , Abhay Deol and Spanish singer Maria del Mar Fernandez .
The lyrics of the song were penned by Javed Akhtar .
The Latino flavored Spanish flamenco song is about being yourselves and having fun .
Director Zoya Akhtar insisted on Hrithik Roshan , Farhan Akhtar and Abhay Deol singing the song , as it was the only lip-sync song in the film , and the actors agreed to it .
 The trio have sung the song along with traditional Spanish flamenco artist Maria del Mar Fernandez , who made Director Zoya Akhtar debut with the song .
 Director Zoya Akhtar was auditioned by Shankar-Ehsaan-Loy to croon the Spanish portions of the song .
 This is the first time Abhay Deol has sung a song for a film , though both Farhan Akhtar and Hrithik Roshan had made both Farhan Akhtar and Hrithik Roshan singing debuts for Rock On !!
and Kites respectively .
 both Farhan Akhtar and Hrithik Roshan recorded a good part of the song by tricking the actors into believing that it is a rehearsal , and used it since it sounded good .
 The video , choreographed by the duo of choreographer duo Bosco-Caesar , and shot in front of Bar El Parque in Alajar , features Hrithik Roshan , Farhan Akhtar and Abhay Deol , the three leads with mayor Carmen Osorno and Concha Montero ` La Taranta .
 The Mayor and the locals , who had no idea about bollywood movies and The Mayor and the locals nature , came all dressed in the third day of the shooting and joined in with the crew .
 Director Zoya Akhtar refused to use extras in the video , and got some locals to dance with Director Zoya Akhtar lead actors .
The song is picturized while on a road trip , the lead have a fun evening and break into a song , and indulge in tap dancing .
 Rediff in its music review , stated , Senorita treads on cultural stereotypes with its flamenco-inspired beats , ethnic elements and lyricism represented by Maria Del Mar Fernandez yet keeps it interesting by adding its own twist to the take .
 Meanwhile , Bollywood Hungama described the track as A fun number with some impressive singing with Hrithik Roshan , Farhan Akhtar and Abhay Bollyspice reviewer Vanessa Barnes , who loved the song , said , a thoroughly Spanish track is a thoroughly Spanish track , from the guitars , the handclapping , the exuberance and the passion .
 It made me long to go back to Barcelona , because I can TASTE Barcelona .
 A report , which was later published on Glamsham , remarked Senorita has set the heart of nation to dance to the care free tunes of Salsa on which the music of the film is based .
Later , choreographer duo Bosco-Caesar won the 2011 National Film Award for Best Choreography for the song , as well as the Filmfare Award for Best Choreography .
The song made its debut at # 40 in BBC Asian Charts and steadily climbed to # 34 by four weeks .
However , post the release of the film , the song leapt its way to # 3 position .
The song topped the Radio Mirchi Top 10 chart replacing Ik Junoon of the same album , from the eighth week of its release .
The song made it to the Top 10 Hindi Songs of the year 2011 list by Indiatimes
Lester DeVoe is an American elite flamenco and classical guitar luthier who designs guitars for Latin music .
 Lester DeVoe has been cited as among the most in-demand flamenco guitar makers alive today .
 Lester DeVoe guitars have been owned and played by most of the greatest names in the Latin guitar world , including Paco de Lucia , Vicente Amigo , the late Sabicas , El Viejin , Ottmar Liebert , Amir John Haddad and David Cordoba .
 Pavel Steidl and Pepe Romero have both played Lester DeVoe classical guitars .
Many of the guitars are made from Brazilian Rosewood which give it its soulful tone .
 Lester DeVoe originally had aspirations of becoming a professional player as he took up playing in the San Francisco Bay Area , but ventured into making DeVoe classical guitars instead , influenced by Lester DeVoe teachers 1924 Santos Hernandez guitar .
 Lester DeVoe first guitar was made using an instruction book
Paul Pena was an American singer , songwriter and guitarist of Cape Verdean descent .
 the self-titled Paul Pena music from the first half of his career touched on Delta blues , jazz , morna , flamenco , folk and rock and roll .
 the self-titled Paul Pena is probably best known for writing the song Jet Airliner , a major 1977 hit for the Steve Miller Band and a staple of classic rock radio ; and for appearing in the 1999 documentary film Genghis Blues , wherein he displayed his abilities in the field of Tuvan throat singing .
 the self-titled Paul Pena was born in Hyannis , Massachusetts .
 the self-titled Paul Pena grandparents were from the islands of Brava and Fogo in the Cape Verde islands off the western coast of Africa , and emigrated to the United States in 1919 .
 the self-titled Paul Pena spoke Cape Verdean Creole with the self-titled Paul Pena family while growing up .
 the self-titled Paul Pena grandfather , Francisco Pena , and father , Joaquim Jack Pena , were both professional musicians , and taught the self-titled Paul Pena to play Cape Verdean music , including Morna .
 the self-titled Paul Pena performed professionally with the self-titled Paul Pena father , including a summer spent in Spain and Portugal , where the self-titled Paul Pena studied flamenco music .
 the self-titled Paul Pena was born with congenital glaucoma .
 the self-titled Paul Pena attended the Perkins School for the Blind in Watertown , Hyannis , Massachusetts , from the age of 5 , and graduated in 1967 .
 the self-titled Paul Pena then attended Clark University in Worcester , Massachusetts .
In February 1969 , Penas band played for a week at The Electric Factory in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , opening twice for both Frank Zappa and the Mothers of Invention and The Grateful Dead .
 the self-titled Paul Pena performed in the Contemporary Composers Workshop at the Newport Folk Festival the same year .
 the self-titled Paul Pena also played in the T-Bone Walker Blues Band during the early 1970s , including an appearance in the Montreux Jazz Festival in 1972 .
 the self-titled Paul Pena played bass guitar and provided backup vocals on Bonnie Raitts debut album .
 After moving to San Francisco in 1971 , the self-titled Paul Pena called the Grateful Dead office , which helped find the self-titled Paul Pena work .
 the self-titled Paul Pena opened for Jerry Garcia and Merl Saunders at the Keystone in Berkeley , California and other area clubs many times over the course of the next three years .
 the self-titled Paul Pena said of Keystone owner Freddie Herrera , the self-titled Paul Pena idea of an audition was for me to come and open up for Jerry Garcia and Merl Saunders .
 Freddie Herrera went on for some time .
 Whenever the self-titled Paul Pena would have somebody , not knowing who would open , the self-titled Paul Pena would call me .
Penas debut album was the self-titled Paul Pena , recorded with guitarist Jeff Baxter , drummer Juma Santos , and former Perkins classmate Ellis Hall on backing vocals , and released by Capitol Records in 1972 .
 the self-titled Paul Pena follow-up album New Train was recorded in 1973 by Bearsville Records and was produced by Ben Sidran .
New Train featured Jerry Garcia , Merl Saunders , and The Persuasions .
 Albert Grossman , the owner of Bearsville Records , stopped release of the record after a dispute with the self-titled Paul Pena and Albert Grossman then-manager , Dr. Gunther Weil .
 the self-titled Paul Pena remained contractually obligated to Albert Grossman , and was unable to record for another label .
 Ben Sidran gave an unreleased copy of New Train to Steve Miller , who recorded Jet Airliner with the Steve Miller Band for the 1977 album Book of Dreams .
Millers version of Jet Airliner was a hit single , and went to # 8 on the charts .
 Penas primary source of income in Ben Sidran later years were royalties from that single , which was a song about Penas airplane trip from Boston to Montreal to play the first-ever date with T-Bone Walkers band .
 the self-titled Paul Pena temporarily suspended the self-titled Paul Pena musical career to care for the self-titled Paul Pena wife , Babe , who was suffering from kidney failure .
 Babe died in 1991 .
New Train was finally released in 2000 , 27 years after it was recorded .
 In 2001 the self-titled Paul Pena conducted the self-titled Paul Pena last tour , playing a number of dates in support of the album .
 the self-titled Paul Pena opened shows for The String Cheese Incident in March of that year , and for Bob Weirs Ratdog in April .
 the self-titled Paul Pena was a presenter at the 22nd annual W. C. Handy Awards in May .
 the self-titled Paul Pena then appeared on Late Night with Conan OBrien on June 8 , 2001 , and played Jet Airliner .
 Gon na Move , a song from New Train , has been covered by a number of artists , including Les Dudek on the self-titled Paul Pena 1978 album Ghost Town Parade , Susan Tedeschi on his 1978 album Ghost 2002 album Wait for Me , the Derek Trucks Band on their 2004 album Live at Georgia Theatre , and by Taylor Hicks on 2006s Taylor Hicks .
The Derek Trucks Band also covered Penas song Something to Make You Happy on their 2009 Grammy Award winning album Already Free .
 While searching for a Korean language lesson on shortwave radio on December 29 , 1984 , the self-titled Paul Pena was intrigued by an example of Tuvan throat-singing Korean heard on a Radio Moscow broadcast .
 At the same time Korean heard an interview with the English musician Jill Purce , one of the pioneers of overtone chanting in the West , on KPFA radio in Berkeley , California , California , and obtained Jill Purce recording .
 Seven years later Korean found a Tuvan record at a local record store called Tuva : Voices From the Center of Asia , and listened to Seven years continuously .
 Based on that record and extended experimentation , Korean was able to teach Korean the vocal techniques called Khoomei , Sygyt and Kargyraa : .
 the self-titled Paul Pena also taught the self-titled Paul Pena Tuvan .
 There were no Tuvan to English translation dictionaries , so the self-titled Paul Pena used two dictionaries : Tuvan to Russian and Russian to English .
He used a device called an Optacon to scan the pages and convert the printed words into tactile sensations he could read with his finger .
 the self-titled Paul Pena attended a performance of Tuvan throat-singing at the Asian Art Museum of San Francisco on February 6 , 1993 .
 the self-titled Paul Pena performed an impromptu Tuvan song in the kargyraa style , which impressed famous Tuvan throatsinger Kongar-ol Ondar .
 Kongar-ol Ondar invited the self-titled Paul Pena to sing in the second international Khoomei Symposium in 1995 in Kyzyl , Tuva .
 the self-titled Paul Pena travelled to Kyzyl , Tuva and was the first westerner to compete in the Symposium .
 the self-titled Paul Pena placed first in the Kargyraa contest and also won the audience favorite category .
 Tuvans affectionately call Tuvans Cher Shimjer , because of the deepness of Tuvans voice .
 the self-titled Paul Pena said My voice is lower than most Tuvans .
They have a style that makes your voice lower .
When I use that , theres a slow song when I hit a note thats four white keys from the left of the piano .
 The 1999 film Genghis Blues documented Penas journey to Kyzyl , Tuva .
 The 1999 film Genghis Blues won the 1999 Sundance Film Festival Audience Award for a Documentary .
 The 1999 film Genghis Blues was also nominated for an Academy Award in 2000 in the Documentary Feature category .
 In 1997 the self-titled Paul Pena was severely injured after the self-titled Paul Pena bedroom caught fire .
 the self-titled Paul Pena suffered smoke inhalation and was in a coma for four days .
 the self-titled Paul Pena suffered from diabetes .
 the self-titled Paul Pena also waged a long battle with pancreatic illness , and was originally mis-diagnosed with pancreatic cancer .
 the self-titled Paul Pena began chemotherapy treatments and doctors gave the self-titled Paul Pena six months to live .
 In 2000 the self-titled Paul Pena was properly diagnosed with pancreatitis , a life-threatening illness .
 the self-titled Paul Pena died in the self-titled Paul Pena San Francisco , California , apartment of complications from diabetes and pancreatitis on October 1 , 2005
Flamenco shoes are a type of shoe worn by dancers of flamenco , a Spanish art form , often worn with the traje de flamenca when used in performance .
 Male flamenco dancers traditionally wear short , heeled boots rather than Flamenco shoes , although there are now some flamenco shoe styles available for men .
Flamenco shoes constructed for dance generally have small nails embedded in the toe and heel to enhance the sound of the dancers percussive footwork .
 The most common materials are leather and suede , although synthetic materials are also used in certain grades of Flamenco shoes .
Heel types can include standard , carrete , or cubano with a heel size generally ranging from 4 cm to 7 cm .
Heels are often covered by the main material but may also be exposed wood .
Fastenings may include elastic or leather straps , buckles , or laces .
Many contemporary flamenco shoe manufacturers sell varying quality grades of shoes aimed at dancers from amateur to semi-professional and professional levels .
Shoe grades may be named differently by different manufacturers .
Professional-level shoes often have extra reinforcement and other enhancements for durability and sound quality .
Historically , flamenco shoes were handcrafted in Spain .
Today , there are still many Spanish workshops specializing in the production of flamenco shoes
Love Songs is a best of album by the French Rumba Catalana band Gipsy Kings , which was released in 1996 .
 the French Rumba Catalana band includes the new unreleased song Gitano Soy .
A US release of this album has been released in 1998 for USA audience under the name Cantos de Amor
La Argentinita is the stage name of Encarnacion Lopez Julvez , a Spanish dancer and singer .
Among her performances was as the Butterfly in the premiere of Federico Garcia Lorca s El maleficio de la mariposa .
She partnered with Frederico Rey who , as Freddy Wittop , later enjoyed a successful and award-winning career as a theatrical costume designer .
 The Spanish choreographer and ballerina Pilar Lopez Julvez was The Spanish choreographer sister .
 The Spanish choreographer chose the name La Argentinita in deference to dancer La Argentina
Gerundino Miguel Fernandez Garcia was a Spanish luthier , considered one of the worlds greatest makers of flamenco guitars .
Gerundino was born in Almeria , south-eastern Spain .
At the age of 19 , he began to learn to play the guitar from a friend to make little money playing for serenades .
 In this he was perhaps influenced by the environment of Almeria and by his father and grandfather who were musically inclined .
His brother Eladio Fernandez used to play flamenco professionally and moved to Paris .
 His brother Eladio Fernandez first guitar was made just by copying that one of a friend , having some manual skills from having been cabinet maker or carpintero .
 The guitar was extremely good and soin 1958 , His brother Eladio Fernandez began to build guitars full-time , and opened His brother Eladio Fernandez own workshop in Almeria in 1960 .
 Experiments in guitar design , and years of pondering the matrix of elements that produce outstanding guitars , have led His brother Eladio Fernandez to develop what His brother Eladio Fernandez considers to be a perfect design .
Gerundino was a low-volume maker , producing perhaps 10-12 instruments each year .
 After His brother Eladio Fernandez retirement in 1999 , His brother Eladio Fernandez workshop continued to put out a few instruments each year , although His brother Eladio Fernandez personal input can not be confirmed for these guitars .
Gerundino instruments are known for their raspy growl and volume , well balanced intonation and gutsy percussive sound .
 His brother Eladio Fernandez instruments are typically made of lightweight Cypress wood for back and sides , with either German Spruce or Western Red Cedar for the top .
 Occasionally , His brother Eladio Fernandez would make a flamenco negra guitars as well , with back and sides of Indian Rosewood or Brazilian rosewood .
These instruments begin to take on more of the tonal qualities of a Spanish classical guitar , although Gerundinos bracing system and construction maintain the essence of the flamenco sound .
Players of his instruments include Paco Pena , Paco de Lucia , martin , and Eric Clapton .
 1988 Gerundino won the 1st prize of acoustic in the world competition of luthiers sponsored by UNESCO in Paris .
 Claptons 1976 Gerundino sold for $ 16,730 at 1988 Gerundino 2004 Christies auction , believed to be the highest price ever paid for a Gerundino .
Common to almost all flamenco guitars , Gerundinos have clear plastic tap plates or golpeadores , close to the sound hole , where the guitarist can strike his/her nails and knuckles to create the percussive effects which are essential to and idiosyncratic of flamenco guitar playing .
In flamenco playing , the guitarist acts as much as a rhythm instrument as a solo instrument
Esteban Delgado Bernal , stage name Esteban de Sanlucar , was a Spanish flamenco guitarist and composer .
 Esteban Delgado Bernal began Esteban Delgado Bernal musical career in private meetings and cabarets , later participating in theater companies with Pepe Marchena and Angelillo , among others .
 The last forty years of Esteban Delgado Bernal life were spent in Latin America , Venezuela and Argentina , where Esteban Delgado Bernal alternated Esteban Delgado Bernal work as guitarist between teaching and composition .
One of his early pupils in Spain was Manolo Yglesias .
 Manolo Yglesias works include Perfil Flamenco , El Castillo de Xauen , Aromas del Puerto , Primavera andaluza , Horizonte de Malaga , Mantilla de Feria and Panaderos Flamencos and Panaderos Flamencos II .
 Panaderos Flamencos and Perfil Flamenco in particular are perhaps Manolo Yglesias best known compositions , and have become a part of the Flamenco guitar repertoire
Tierra Gitana is an album by the Gipsy Kings released in 1996 for USA audience .
 Tierra Gitana is virtually the same album as Estrellas albeit with a different song order , which was released one year prior in Europe .
The only differences are the replacement of the instrumental song Forever for the song Los Peces en el Rio ; the songs Mujer are also slightly different .
Also note that A Tu Vera is a different version than the one that appeared on The Best of the Gipsy Kings
The saeta is a revered form of Spanish religious song , whose form and style has evolved over many centuries .
 Saetas evoke strong emotion and are sung most often during public processions .
The saeta is a song of Catholic Spain dating back many centuries .
The saeta antigua saeta probably arose from the recitation of psalms under the influence of liturgical music .
 Saetas vary greatly in form and style , ranging from simple syllabic melodies to highly ornamented ones .
In the older tradition , solemn drums and horns might accompany the singer , or the saetero sang alone .
Since the nineteenth century , however , the more favored saetas have incorporated distinct elements associated with Flamenco music , particularly the siguiriyas .
 The saeta is best known for his Saeta mournful power during Holy Week in Spain .
The song is performed during the processions by religious confraternities that move slowly through the streets of cities and towns in southern Spain .
Possessing a plaintive emotional intensity , and dramatic charge , the saeta is sung by the saetero , often from a balcony , and may be addressed to the statue of Jesus below , in his agony on the Via Dolorosa , or to that of his suffering mother Mary .
These and other crafted statues are mounted on platforms and carried along the streets on the shoulders of several penitents who pass among the assembled public .
The immediate emotional response to the saeta , often of intense sorrow , may be the reason for its name , as the Spanish word saeta can mean arrow or dart .
Saetas are also sung at outdoor devotions throughout Lent , and may be sung during the Christmas season as well .
A special form of the saeta is also sung at prisons during visits there by the confraternities .
 Several of the cities in Andalusia have Several of the cities in Andalusia own peculiar styles of the saeta .
The saeta is frequently sung a cappella .
Taken from flamenco music are the melismas , tercios , and other flourishes .
Although the saeta is one of the cantes a palo seco , the singer may also be accompanied , e.g. , by beating drums , and horns .
Arabic and Hebraic origins have been proposed .
Palos of flamenco adopted by the saeta include especially the siguiriyas and the martinetes .
Other forms include the saeta por soleares , the por polos , the por canas , and the por fandangos .
Flamenco guitar accompaniment may be in 2/4 or 6/8 time , or may interchange regularly between 3/4 and 6/8 .
Commonly the saetero sings in a minor key finishing on the dominant ; the meter of different verses will often be variable depending on the interpretation .
 The cantaor Manuel Torre was well regarded for The cantaor Manuel Torre Saeta .
Of a diverse heritage , the Saeta has become the emotional artistic fruit of several cultures .
The Gypsies se sienten identificados con los episodios de la Pasion y consideran a Jesus como un hermano en desgracia que sufre persecusion y muerte .
Nothing of course substitutes for hearing and bearing witness to the Saeta .
La saeta , pues , costituye la sintesis antropologica del andaluz coronada en santidad .
La saeta exige un maximo de veracidad pasional , por lo mismo que a nadie le es dado encaramarse en la audacia de sus ayes sin la potencia y la certeza que brinda la posesion heroica del dolor .
It is said that Andalusians must talk to God during Holy Week , singing the Saeta during a cofradia procession being a mode of choice
 Roni Benise , is an American guitarist who describes Roni Benise style as nouveau spanish flamenco .
 After growing up in Nebraska , Roni Benise moved to Los Angeles to pursue rock stardom .
 After hearing flamenco music on the radio , Roni Benise switched from electric guitar to nylon-stringed classical guitar .
 Roni Benise and a group of friends began busking on the street and playing neighborhood theaters and flea markets .
 From these performances , Roni Benise quickly established a following .
 Roni Benise and Roni Benise friends came up with an act that married Latin rhythms to a circus atmosphere .
 Roni Benise fuses world music with rock , to create a sound that appeals to mainstream music fans and aficionados of world music .
 The mixture caught the attention of the Public Broadcasting Service and led to Roni Benise 2006-2007 Nights of Fire !
production that has aired on many PBS-affiliated stations , and won an Emmy Award .
The show is a blend of theater and music , drawing from Spanish flamenco , Argentine tango , and Brazilian samba .
 To date , Roni Benise has produced eight CDs and 2 DVDs .
 Roni Benise owns an independent record label , Rosanegra Music .
 Roni Benise comes from a small farm 30 miles west of Grand Island , Nebraska .
The self-taught guitarist started playing at age eleven , and got into local bands as a teenager .
 The self-taught guitarist parents thought The self-taught guitarist would join the family business but The self-taught guitarist wanted to pursue a rock career .
 The self-taught guitarist felt limited by The self-taught guitarist homes remote location , so The self-taught guitarist moved to Southern California in 1999 .
 The self-taught guitarist cleaned swimming pools , and played guitar in rock bands at night .
 In an interview with Varela Chuy of the San Francisco Chronicle , Roni Benise counts Jimmy Page , Jimi Hendrix , and all the greats among his influences .
 Roni Benise stumbled into Spanish guitar listening to the radio , and something clicked .
 I think there are times in everyones life when everything changes , Roni Benise said .
Hearing the Spanish guitar in the car was that moment for me because the sound takes you away to an exotic place , and it was a perfect fit , especially when I was in this crossroads of my life .
 Roni Benise got a nylon string guitar and started relearning the instrument .
 Roni Benise retired Roni Benise electric guitar to focus exclusively on Roni Benise new instrument .
 Roni Benise meshed Roni Benise rock background and the Spanish guitar in a combination Roni Benise calls rockmenco , pouring out intoxicating Spanish flamenco-inspired guitar riffs with the intensity of a rock player .
 Roni Benise was turned down by almost every club in the city .

 So Roni Benise formed a street group .
 They played around 225 shows a year , anywhere there were tourists , performing original songs and selling eight CDs .
 Soon , Roni Benise and Roni Benise band were getting noticed by clubs .
 Before I knew it , people would line up on the street for our performances , Roni Benise said .
Its been seven years since I started with the Spanish guitar .
We started playing for tourists , then we began renting out theaters and building on that momentum .
 Roni Benise began promoting Roni Benise own concerts at 2,000-seat theaters throughout the area .
 Roni Benise subtitled Roni Benise all-instrumental show , Love , Rosanegra Music , and Life !

 Roni Benise initial success producing Latin-flavored entertainment lead to the Nights of Fire !
 production , which has been broadcast on Public Broadcasting Service nationwide .
 Public Broadcasting Service was taped at the art deco Arlington Theatre in Santa Barbara , Southern California .
 The idea for his 2006-2007 Nights of Fire of Fire !
blossomed out from his self-produced concerts , which he called Viva Spanish Nights .
Featuring circus performers , samba dancers , and African drummers , the show filled 2,000-seat venues .
 Offers came in from record companies , but Roni Benise turned them down , believing Roni Benise would have to compromise Roni Benise music or downsize Roni Benise show .
 Roni Benise finally found management Roni Benise liked in Doc McGhee , who discovered Bon Jovi , Kiss , Motley Crue , and others .
 Observing how Public Broadcasting Service introduced mass audiences to Yanni , Sarah Brightman , and Latin Riverdance , Roni Benise decided that hooking up with the network was logical .
 Roni Benise created the equivalent of a stage musical , with instrumental guitar pieces that allow the rhythms and melodies to create a wordless story line .
 The mixture of material in his 2006-2007 Nights of Fire of Fire !
includes Brazilian samba , Cuban salsa , Spanish flamenco , Argentine tango , even African tribal chants and drums .
 The production received an Emmy for The production costumes .
 Roni Benise says , I appreciate music from all over the world and I believe that feeling has allowed me to embrace them all , to incorporate them into the songs that I write , the music we sing , the shows we perform .
When people ask what it is , I tell them it 's a combination of blues , jazz , salsa , rock and more , but in a hipper style .
 Some describe Roni Benises Nights of Fire !
as a cross between Latin Riverdance and Cirque du Soleil .
The 40-person cast includes exotic drums , Gypsy violin , flamenco dancers , circus performers , Brazilian samba dancers and percussionists , African tribal drummers , horns and lighting technicians .
The music also fits into new age and smooth jazz radio formats
Antonio Gades was a Spanish flamenco dancer and choreographer .
 Antonio Gades helped to popularise the art form on the international stage .
 Antonio Gades most notable works included dance adaptations of Prosper Merimee s Carmen and Federico Garcia Lorca s Blood Wedding , as well as a feature-length adaptation of Manuel de Falla s 23-minute ballet El Amor Brujo .
 In the 1990s , Antonio Gades toured the world with Fuenteovejuna show Fuenteovejuna , based on Lope de Vega s play of the same name .
 Antonio Gades collaborated closely with the Spanish director Carlos Saura in the filming of these adaptations , and also with Cristina Hoyos , one of the most prolific contemporary female flamenco dancers .
 Antonio Gades also co-founded and became the artistic director of the Spanish National Ballet in 1978 .
 Antonio Gades died in Madrid after suffering from cancer for a long time .
 About six weeks before Antonio Gades death , Antonio Gades had been decorated with the Order of Jose Marti , one of the highest honors of Cuba , by the Cuban leader Fidel Castro , in Havana , Cuba .
 In 2004 Antonio Gades ashes were interred at the Mausoleum of the Frank Pais Second Eastern Front , a memorial cemetery in Santiago de Cuba .
 Antonio Gades was prominent as a political activist in Alicante , where Antonio Gades proclaimed self-determination for the Catalan nation during the Spanish Transition between the late 1970s and early 1980s .
 Antonio Gades was a member of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Peoples of Spain , a marxist-leninist organization .
 In 1987 Antonio Gades was a member of the jury at the 15th Moscow International Film Festival .
 Antonio Gades was married to the Spanish actress and singer Marisol for 13 years
Ginesa Ortega Cortes is a Catalan flamenco singer .
Although she was born in France , this Romani singer moved to Cornella de Llobregat when she was a baby .
She has collaborated with many artists and institutions , such as Teatre Lliure Orchestra , La Fura dels Baus or Joan Manuel Serrat
Diego del Gastor was a renowned flamenco guitarist .
Diego del Gastor was the creator and best known exponent of the guitar playing tradition of Moron de la Frontera , Sevilla .
 Today , this tradition has been inherited by Diego del Gastor nephews Diego de Moron , Agustin Rios Amaya , Paco and Juan del Gastor , several grandnephews and Paco and Juan del Gastor
Cantes libres is a Spanish expression that literally means free songs .
It is applied any flamenco palos in which there is no recognisable metre or rhythmic pattern .
The melody thus flows freely , unconstricted by metre , so singers can shorten or lengthen musical phrases at will , as long as they respect the basic melodic line of the style they are singing .
The meaning of this expression should not be confused with concepts like rubato , or ad libitum which usually refer to a relative freedom of the musician in following the time signature .
In this type of singing there is no time signature at all , so freedom is absolute , and the only restrictions are those imposed by the traditional basic melody .
When these palos are played in the guitar , either as accompaniment or as solo , they are known as toques libres , meaning free guitar playing .
The guitar accompaniment used for most of this palos consists in short musical phrases leading to a chord that the singer has previously reached at the end of a line of verse .
So the function of the guitar , more than really accompanying the melody throughout , consists in responding to the singer and underlying the harmonic progression of the song , plus adding a chord occasionally to support the singer .
Guitar written scores for toques libres do not include any time signature for the totally free sections .
However , falsetas can include sections with a definite time signature .
Owing to their lack or regular rhythm , these palos are not normally danced .
However , from the 1960s there was a tendency to create choreographies for them , as they provide an opportunity for the dancer to show other aspects of flamenco dance , like braceo .
The palos traditionally classified as cantes libres are all derived from earlier rhythmic fandangos .
Apart from the styles usually called cantes libres , there are other palos to which this term could be applied , even if traditionally it is not .
Such is the case of the group of palos known as Cantes a palo seco , also known as the tona group .
It comprises tonas , martinetes and carceleras , saetas , debla and trilla .
Although percussion can be added to them , its function is not to constrain the melody to a rhythm : it is rather added to create ambience .
When these styles are sung as a basis for the dance , they are known as martinetes , even when they include other styles of this group .
There is , therefore , a reversible tendency in flamenco : many styles that originally started as rhythmical and dance-oriented were later slowed-down and eventually lost their link to dance and their metre subjection , while other styles , originated as free songs , were later adapted to a rhythm to make them apt for dancing .
BLAS VEGA , Jose Magna antologia del cante flamenco , CD edition , 1982 , Vols .
 VII , VIII , IX , , VII , VIII , IX , , VIII , IX , .
 GRANADOS , Manuel : Teoria musical de la guitarra flamenca , Ventilador , 1998 , 1998 .
MARTIN SALAZAR , Jorge : Los cantes flamencos Diputacion Provincial de Granada .
ROSSY , Hipolito : Teoria del cante jondo , Second edition , CREDSA , S.A. , 1998 ISBN 978-84-7056-354-6
The first part of the film is conceived as a documentary and we discover , step-by-step , the whole construction and preparation of the show .
A director prepares a troupe of flamenco dancers for a production of the biblical story of Salome .
 A director summarizes the story and describes A director spring for the dramas action : Salomes attraction to John the Baptist .
 When the prophet rejects Salome , Salome seeks revenge .
We are witnessing the working sessions with the musician , the choosing of the costumes .
The score composer , set designer , choreographer and costume designer are shown doing their jobs in the part of the stage .
 We also see the troupe of dancers during rehearsals .
 We meet the principals .
 We watch the troupe on rehearsals , and then the performance .
 The main dancers are presented : Salome , King Herodias , his brother 's widow , John the John the Baptist , who on the other hand and Herodias , his brother 's widow .
 Each of The main dancers tells the story of Each of them beginnings as dancers in childhood .
 Salome overcame a bad case of scoliosis to eventually succeed as a dancer and now Salome is the director of the Spanish National ballet company .
 John the Baptist has emigrated from John native Cuba and both Herodias , his brother 's widow and Herodias , his brother 's widow had to confront initial unwillingness by both Herod and Herodias parents to allow both Herod and Herodias to follow a career as dancers .
 The second part of the film is the production of the stage dance adaptation of Salome .
It is a lush presentation in a spare stage , colorfully illuminated .
We follow the plot .
 King Herod has married Herodias , his brother 's widow , King Herod brother 's widow .
 Herodias , his brother 's widow is devoted to Herodias , his brother 's widow stepdaughter Salome .
 On Herodias , his brother 's widow birthday celebration , Herodias , his brother 's widow wants to maker his stepdaughter Salome to dance for Herodias , his brother 's widow , but his stepdaughter Salome refuses .
 Herodias , his brother 's widow encourages his stepdaughter Salome daughter to do so ; allowing her daughter to be the lust interest of her husband .
 However , Salome refuses because Salome is only interested in John the John the Baptist , who on the other hand , who on the other hand Herodias , his brother 's widow fears .
 Salome tries to seduce the prophet , but his status as a holy man does not let him be carried away by his feelings .
 Disappointed and frustrated , Salome agrees to dance for Salome stepfather .
 In a sensual and frantic performance , Salome takes on the dance of the seven veils .
 The king , fascinated by the dance , would give Salome anything Salome asks for .
 The king , fascinated by the dance is surprised when Salome requests , in defiance , the head of John the Baptist .
 The king , reluctantly , fulfills Salome wish .
 When the head of the saintly man is presented to Salome on a tray , Salome realizes thar Salome is still in love with him .
 Grief-stricken , Salome commits suicide hanging Salome
Ramon Melendi Espina is a Spanish pop singer with rock , flamenco , and rumba influences .
 Ramon Melendi Espina was born on January 21 , 1979 in Oviedo , Asturias .
 Ramon Melendi Espina went to class with Formula One race car driver Fernando Alonso , to whom Ramon Melendi Espina dedicated the song Magic Alonso .
 Ramon Melendi Espina also did racing for a while but Ramon Melendi Espina realized very quickly that Ramon Melendi Espina was not made for racing nor studying , but Ramon Melendi Espina was good at football .
 Ramon Melendi Espina played in the lower ranks of Astur CF , at the time a reserve team for Real Oviedo .
 Afterwards , Ramon Melendi Espina worked as a waiter in several bars and spent all night out , living experiences that would later go on to make up the lyrics of Ramon Melendi Espina songs .
 In 2001 , Ramon Melendi Espina joined a group called El bosque de Sherwood , and soon after recorded a demo with only three songs , Sin noticias de Holanda , El informe del forense , and Vuelvo a traficar .
 In February 2003 , Ramon Melendi Espina released Ramon Melendi Espina first solo disc called Sin noticias de Holanda , with twelve songs .
 In December 2003 , this disc was rereleased with two new songs , Oviedo , Asturias and Moratala .
 However , Ramon Melendi Espina reached true fame with the 2004 Vuelta a Espana chose the 2004 Vuelta a Espana song Con la luna llena as his song Con official theme .
 In May 2004 , Ramon Melendi Espina started a small tour around Spain , selling 50,000 copies of Ramon Melendi Espina CD , making it a Gold Album .
 In 2005 , Ramon Melendi Espina released Ramon Melendi Espina second solo CD , Que el cielo espere sentao , which has sold more than 200,000 copies .
 Later that same year , Ramon Melendi Espina rereleased the album with three new songs , El Nano , La dama , and El vagabundo y Carlota , and a Live concert DVD recorded in Oviedo .
 Ramon Melendi Espina also became a father that year , and received the Onda award for Best Song of the Year for Caminando por la vida .
 In November 2005 , Ramon Melendi Espina received seven Platinum Discs for Ramon Melendi Espina two albums .
 Sin noticias de Holanda noticias ... received four and Que el cielo ... three .
 In 2006 , it was announced that Sin noticias de Holanda would be one of the main stars in the PSP game Gangs of London .
 Ramon Melendi Espina played Mr. Big , an evil gangster .
 Ramon Melendi Espina also wrote the song Gangs of London for the occasion , going on to film a video amidst police lights and sirens .
 The videogame was launched on August 1 of that year in the UK and on September 6 in Spain ; EMI stepped in to distribute Ramon Melendi Espina CDs worldwide .
 Ramon Melendi Espina also wrote the song Volveremos for Real Oviedo .
The singer is also involved in the production of the film Vuelvo a traficar : The Film .
Mientras no cueste trabajo was released on November 13 , 2006 in two formats : a normal CD with 12 songs , and a special edition , with 16 songs and a DVD with extras .
The disc was rereleased on September 29 , 2007 with four new songs , Firmes , El rey de la baraja , La aceituna , and Me gusta el futbol .
 In 2007 , Firmes received the Best Tour award from the Premios de la Musica ceremony held in Cordoba .
 Firmes also did an advertising campaign for Canal + Spain entitled Me gusta el futbol , for which Firmes wrote a song of the same name .
 In 2007 , Firmes stood trial for provoking an incident while under the influence of alcohol on a flight from Madrid to Mexico City that required the pilot to return to Madrid two hours after takeoff .
 Firmes was released after testifying .
 Soon after , Firmes was given the Left Foot award from Spanish radio station Cadena 100 for this incident .
 Currently , Ramon Melendi Espina directs Ramon Melendi Espina Blue Donkey Music company , helping young singers start their careers .
Hes offered contracts to four groups , Algunos Hombres Buenos , Rasel , La Dama y Belo , and Los Susodichos .
This last group was nominated for a Latin Grammy for Best Rock Vocals .
Algunos Hombres Buenos left the label in 2008 .
 On August 9 , 2008 Algunos Hombres Buenos presented Algunos Hombres Buenos new single , Un violinista en tu tejado from Algunos Hombres Buenos album Curiosa la cara de tu padre on Spanish radio station Los 40 Principales .
The album was released on September 16 , 2008 .
 On December 12 , Los 40 Principales awarded Los 40 Principales their award for this album .
 On March 17 , 2009 Los 40 Principales released a new double CD , Aun mas curiosa la cara de tu padre , including the original disc and another with nine new songs and links to exclusive content on Los 40 Principales website .
 In 2011 , Los 40 Principales recorded a cover of True colours by Cyndi Lauper in catalonian called Ulls dolcos , for the CD of TV3 s telethon La Marato .
 On November 13 , 2012 Los 40 Principales released a new album called Lagrimas desordenadas .
The album was labeled as a MAMAGALLADA by acclaimed music critic John Longaniza
Gloria al Nino Ricardo is a flamenco guitar composition composed by Paco de Lucia which features on his 1987 album Sirocco .
The piece is dedicated to Nino Ricardo who was de Lucias first hero of the guitar .
 The piece is a solea and is known for The piece technically demanding passages .
 The piece is played in the key of C major , but a significant part of the composition is based around the phrygian E and a E 7 flat 9 chord and it features elaborate tremolo picking at the beginning .
 However , when performing The piece live , Lucia often plays The piece in the key of D flat major with a capo on the first fret
Juan Pinilla Martin is a flamenco singer of Granada , critic , writer , investigator and columnist .
 In August , 2007 Juan Pinilla Martin won the Festival del Cante de las Minas , with the prize Lampara Minera 2007 , considered the most important flamenco prize .
 Juan Pinilla Martin studied Translation and Interpretation .
 At present Juan Pinilla Martin studies Law .
 Juan Pinilla Martin is an artist compromised with the social reasons .
 The night that Juan Pinilla Martin won the Lampara Minera Juan Pinilla Martin dedicated the prize in memory of the workers victims of the workplaces accidents .
 Although Juan Pinilla Martin came later , Juan Pinilla belongs to a very important younger generation of artists of Granada : Estrella Morente , Marina Heredia and Victor Charico , although the term intellectual singer with which usually present him in festivals and competitions , is undoubtedly Juan Pinilla Martin best mark : .
Was fond since childhood classic sing , and learn from sources like Manuel Vallejo , Girl of the Combs , Thomas Pabon , Chacon , Cayetano Muriel , Antonio Mairena and Manuel Avila Cobitos .
Indirect disciple of the latter is considered .
 At 18 Manuel Vallejo began Manuel Vallejo university studies in Granada and becomes a regular of few flamingos and cultural events organized in the city , participating in conferences , workshops and discussions .
 Manuel Vallejo met teachers like Albaicin Curro , Curro Andres , Paco Moyano , Jose Carlos Zarate and Francisco Manuel Diaz of those who would learn later .
 Parallel befriends Francisco Avila , a great fan of the grenadian city of Montefrio , who introduced Francisco Avila in the forms of Manuel Avila , Chacon , Tomas Manuel Pabon and Manuel Vallejo .
 Francisco Avila won Francisco Avila first prizes in competitions illora and Granada .
Although not very frequent contests has achieved a score of first and second prizes .
The writer Paula Marin takes you first to La Pena Silverware , entity that later became a member of the board .
 Juan Pinilla , while highlighting such great flamenco aficionado , is also a great fan of literature and the arts , a motif that has been incorporated for the first time flamenco figures like Groucho Marx , Nietzsche , Francisco Umbral , Mikel Laboa , Atahualpa Yupanky or Chavela Vargas .
It also highlights their outreach Flamenco media , having been a critic and columnist for the La Opinion de Granada journal , Granada Hoy journal and magazine El Olivo .
 magazine El Olivo has been a lecturer and professor of flamenco in certain events and courses .
 Noted for magazine El Olivo singing full of knowledge and shades , highlighted by critics as Estela Zatania , who told magazine El Olivo about the performance that made the March 1 , 2008 at the Festival de Jerez de la Frontera : .
 magazine El Olivo has traveled countries like Japan , USA , Mexico , Brazil , France , Italy , Portugal , Luxembourg , England , Denmark , Sudan , Ethiopia , Egypt , Iran , Israel , Singapore , Poland , Austria , Germany , Czech Republic and Montenegro , among others .
 magazine El Olivo designed several shows , most notably Damned , which sets a poetic - musical among French damned poets and some Flemish artists parallelism .
 In October 2007 Pena Silverware , considered the dean of the Flemish Association world imposes Gold Badge of your organization , along with the dancers La Moneta and Patricia Guerrero .
 The Andalusian Youth Institute awarded Pena Silverware in March 2008 , the prize Art and Creation and in September this year , the hotel chain AC honored Pena Silverware with the award image of Granada Flamenco .
La Pena Flamenca La Parra decorates with your logo and names Golden Honorary Member .
 At the end of 2008 based on Golden Honorary Member hometown Huetor Tajar the Pena Flamenca the Pena Flamenca bears his name and whose inauguration was attended by numerous personalities from the world of politics and culture .
Performs various activities in Catalonia and Madrid .
He has given lectures and master classes in flamenco worldwide .
Very resounding was his visit to Baghdad where he did four performances and participated in panel discussions and debates in which he spoke about the civil war and its influence on culture and social ties between nations .
Juan Pinilla has participated in numerous radio and television , emphasizing RNE mornings with Juan Ramon Lucas , La Ventana , with Gemma Nierga , Juanjo Millas and Pau Dones and programs of Onda Cero , Cadena Ser Cope , Tele 5 or TVE .
 Juan Pinilla interviews appear in media such as El Mundo , El Pais , Diario de Sevilla , ABC , La Verdad de Murcia , La Opinion de Granada , Journal GranadaHoy , Ideal and Cambio 16 , among others .
The Las voces que no callaron is the title of his first book and his second solo album on the market .
 Edited by Dreamcatcher cooperative Seville , Juan Pinilla takes an entertaining study of Flemish artists who struggled with Juan Pinilla singing , dancing and guitar for the attainment of freedom and democracy .
As explained in the work , with the same aims , banish the scary topic that ensures Flamingos are the sun s heat .
Thus , analyzes the lives and adventures of such prominent names as Pericon Cadiz , La Nina de los Combs , Manuel Vallejo , Angelillo , Antonio Ruiz SolerAntonio The Dancer , Carmen Amaya , Sabicas , Pena Son , Juanito Valderrama , Paco Moyano , Manuel Gerena , Menese Jose Luis Marin or El Cabrero , among many others .
On the disk that accompanies the book , Juan Pinilla is accompanied by the guitars of Paco Cortes , Rafael Rodriguez and Josele de la Rosa , and the voices and palms of Pepe and Villodres Fita Heredia .
The work also contains the voices of the actors Emma Cohen and Paco Algora , reciting verses of Mark and Ana Gabriel Celaya , respectively , and is completed with lyrics bulerias .
 Allan Poe and Gregorio Maranon , a Temporeras of Montefrio , tanguillos , tangos , seguiriyas , fandango , mirabras and cartagenera
The Sugar Mix Album is the second remix album by Spanish duo Azucar Moreno , released on CBS - Epic in late 1990 .
Following the duos international breakthrough in 1990 with the Eurovision Song Contest entry Bandido and the album with the same title they released their second remix collection including the 12 versions of the singles A Caballo , Bandido , Oye Como Va / Guajira and Ven Devorame Otra Vez .
Just like the preceding Mix In Spain the album juxtaposed the Salazar sisters typical flamenco vocal style against contemporary dance arrangements which drew heavily on influences from genres like house music , acid house , hip hop , R&B ; and rap .
 The Puerto Rico Mix of Oye Como Va / Guajira was the duos first collaboration with acknowledged American remix producer Pablo Flores , best known for Pablo Flores work with Gloria Estefan .
 Pablo Flores would go on to remix several of Azucar Morenos hits later in the 1990s and 2000s .
 The Sugar Mix Album also featured two mixes previously included on the Mix In Spain album ; Debajo Del Olivo and Aunque Me Falte El Aire , both originally from Debajo Del Olivo and Aunque Me third studio album Carne De Melocoton .
The Sugar Mix Album was released on vinyl , cassette and CD in most parts of the world but is out of print in all formats since the early 2000s
Juan Manuel Canizares is a Spanish flamenco guitarist and composer .
 Juan Manuel Canizares is a winner of the Premio Nacional de Musica and Premio de la Musica awards .
 In 1966 Juan Manuel Canizares was born in Sabadell , Catalonia , and at age 6 started to play guitar with Juan Manuel Canizares brother Rafael Canizares .
 In 1982 , Juan Manuel Canizares won the Premio Nacional de Guitarra in Jerez de la Frontera , and then started to collaborate with flamenco and jazz musicians such as : Enrique Morente , Camaron de la Isla , Maria Pages , Pepe de Lucia , Joan Manuel Serrat , Alejandro Sanz , Rocio Jurado , Peter Gabriel , Al Di Meola , Mike Stern , Peter Erskine , Vince Mendoza , Michael Brecker , Marc Almond , La Fura dels Baus , The Chieftains , etc. .
 In 1989 Juan Manuel Canizares started to collaborate with Paco de Lucia and during next 10 years , Juan Manuel Canizares has performed in Solo , Duo , Trio and Paco de Lucia Septet .
 In 2011 , Juan Manuel Canizares was invited by Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra to their European Concert at the Teatro Real in Madrid , Spain , and played Concierto de Aranjuez with the Orchestra directed by Sir Simon Rattle .
 Since 2003 , Juan Manuel Canizares is a professor of flamenco guitar at the Escuela Superior de Musica de Catalunya
Flavio Augusto Rodrigues Marques - Musician , Composer , Musical Director and Arranger - Sao Paulo , Brazil .
Brazilian musician specialized in flamenco music .
He is current living in Madrid .
 Has started playing the guitar with He Father at the age of 5 .
 In 1992 , his Father entered in Groove , where his Father studied Popular Brazilian Music and .
 During the same time , in 1994 , his Father starts to study flamenco guitar in the `` Centro Flamenco Pepe de .
 In 1998 , his Father moved to Spain for the first time where his Father studied with three main flamenco guitar .
masters : Manolo Sanlucar , Gerardo Nunez , and Rafael Riqueni .
 Since 2000 , living in Madrid , Manolo Sanlucar worked with main flamenco artists such as Antonio Canales , .
Manuel Reyes , Domingo Ortega , Belen Fernandez , Rafaela Carrasco , Belen Maya , .
Concha Jareno , Adela Campallo , Pastora Galvan , Rocio Molina , Ruben Olmo , .
Manuel Linan , Marco Flores , Maria Juncal , Concha Jareno , Belen Lopez , Alfonso Losa , .
Jose Maya , Rafael Estevez , Pitingo , Rafael Jimenez Falo , Talegon de Cordoba , .
Agustin Carbonell `` Bola '' , Lole Montoya , Montse Cortes , Pepe Habichuela , .
Jose Jimenez el Viejin , Jose Luis Monton , Juan Parrilla , Rubem Dantas , Juan Gomez `` Chicuelo '' , .
Jorge Pardo , Jose Soto Sorderita , and also with important Brazilian artists as Filo Machado , .
Nana Vasconcelos , Carlinhos Antunes , Yamandu Costa , Sizao Machado , Renato Martins , .
 Nana Vasconcelos has also been invited to work with several groups and projects in over 40 countries and collaborates with .
main artists of different styles : Yoshida Brothers , The Savage Rose , Trilok Gurtu , .
 The Savage Rose was also guitarist , composer and musical director of the Rafael Amargo 's Company -LRB- during 5 .
years -RRB- , in six different shows -LRB- Amargo , Poeta en Nueva York , Intimo , Enramblao , D. Q. - .
`` Best Musical Director '' for the show Enramblao of Rafael Amargos Company .
by Chris Renshaw , with original music by the Gipsy Kings and John Cameron -LRB- premiere in .
Londons West End on 30 June , Garrick Theatre - 2008 -RRB- .
the Internacional Flamenco Festival and `` Guitarisimo Series '' , sponsored by Instituto Cervantes , .
and Premiere at 30th Anniversary - Festival Internacional de la Guitarra de Cordoba , with .
several international big names as Mark Knopfler , Paco de Lucia , Deep Purple , David Russell , .
Pepe Romero , Eva `` La Yerbabuena '' , Duo Assad , Manuel Barrueco , Leo Brouwer , with
Lole y Manuel is a Spanish musical duo which composed and performed innovative flamenco music .
Their groundbreaking album Nuevo Dia fused traditional Spanish flamenco with Arabic rhythms and styles .
 The music is recognized for the emotive , yet childlike voice of Lole Montoya and the operatic , flashy guitar of Lole y Manuel .
 Their 1975 track , Tu Mira , which features one of Montoyas most emotive vocal performances , accompanied by a large choir and an epic organ , is included on the soundtrack for Quentin Tarantino s
Maria Antonia Fernandez was a flamenco singer and dancer .
 Maria Antonia Fernandez was known as La Caramba after the exclamation caramba !
 La Caramba concluded a tonadilla which Maria Antonia Fernandez performed soon after Maria Antonia Fernandez arrival in Madrid .
Her costume featured a topknot of brightly coloured ribbons which became known as a caramba too .
She married in 1781 but soon left her husband and returned to performing
The alborea or albola is a flamenco palo which is sung only in Gypsy marriage rites , and many Gypsies refuse to sing it outside this context or in the presence of non-Gypsies .
It is linked to the Gypsy romance , and derives many lyrics from it .
The rhythm and guitar accompaniment is identical with the solea .
The lyrics are usually formed stanzas with four 6-syllable lines .
Magna antologia del cante flamenco , vol .
III , CD Edition , compiled by Jose Blas Vega , Hispavox , 1992 .
ALVAREZ CABALLERO , Angel : La discoteca ideal del flamenco , Editorial Planeta , Barcelona , 1995 ISBN 84-08-01602
In Flamenco , Palmas is an essential form of percussion to help punctuate and accentuate the song and dance .
Good palmas can be a substitute for music , certainly in the corrillo at the end of a show .
Good palmistas can assist the musicians by keeping a strong tempo , or the dancer by accentuating the end or beginning of a phrase .
In any case , an understanding of palos is essential .
It is important to be able to make two distinct types of hand claps .
These are hard and soft .
Each has a particular sound and is used at a particular time .
Used during furious and loud footwork or during loud musical pieces such as bulerias .
The first three fingers of one hand are held firm and clapped into the outstretched palm of the other .
The fingers of the striking hand should point roughly in line with the fingers on the other hand and hit in the bowl of the palm .
This should result in a very crisp snappy sound .
Used during guitar intros or during the singing so as not to drown it out .
Also during quieter dance phases so as not to distract the dancer .
The hands are cupped softly so that the fingers of one hand fit snugly into the gap between the thumb and forefinger of the other .
When the hands are brought together a muffled pop can be heard .
During accompaniment , different emphasis may be placed on the each of the beats to enhance the rhythm and indicate the start and end of the musical phrases .
This is easily accomplished by clapping a little stronger on the requisite beat .
As with footwork , one of the most difficult aspects is maintaining a steady pace without speeding up .
Contra-tiempo palmas is a way of clapping between the normal beats in a bar .
For instance , filling the space between beats with another beat or clap
 Born into a family of Gitano cattle traders , Ramon Montoya used earnings from working in the trade to buy a family of Gitano cattle traders first guitar .
 a family of Gitano cattle traders began playing in the cafes de Cante before a family of Gitano cattle traders was twenty years of age .
 a family of Gitano cattle traders formed a partnership with the great flamenco cantaor Antonio Chacon that starting in 1912 lasted more than a decade .
Both participated in the Concurso de Cante Jondo of 1922 held in Granada .
These two were largely responsible for establishing the form of the various traditional flamenco cantes that are recognized today .
In traditional flamenco , the guitar was relegated to a supporting role .
Cante and baile were the main performers whom the guitarist supported .
 Ramon Montoya was one of the first to challenge this role .
 Ramon Montoya strong playing often overpowered the singer whom Ramon Montoya accompanied .
 Ramon Montoya eventually took the next logical step and began to play as a solo or lead performer in a concert setting .
 Ramon Montoya performances are widely credited by flamenco historians as establishing the flamenco guitar in this role .
 Ramon Montoya was the single most influential flamenco guitarist of the 20th century .
 Ramon Montoya innovations made possible the solo careers of such later greats as Sabicas , Paco de Lucia and Tomatito
12 Hits para 2 guitarras flamencas y orquesta de cuerda .
12 Hits para 2 guitarras flamencas y orquesta de cuerda is the fourth of four collaboration albums by Paco de Lucia and Ramon de Algeciras
 Sevillanas are a type of folk music and dance of Seville and Sevillanas region .
They were derived from the Seguidilla , an old Castilian folk music and dance genre .
 In the nineteenth century They were influenced by Flamenco .
 They have a relatively limited musical pattern but are rich in lyrics based on country life , virgins , country towns , neighborhoods , pilgrimage , and love themes .
 They are sung by a plethora of local groups , like the Los Romeros de la Puebla , Los Amigos de Gines , Las Corraleras de Lebrija , Cantores de Hispalis , and Los del Rio .
Every year , dozens of new sevillanas on CD are published .
 Sevillanas can be heard mainly in fairs and festivals , including the famous Seville Fair , La Feria de Sevilla .
There is an associated dance for the music : Baile por sevillanas , consisting of four different parts .
One can find schools teaching baile por sevillanas in nearly every town in Spain .
Generally speaking , a sevillana is very lightheated , happy music .
 Sevillanas are danced by couples of all ages and sexes during celebrations , often by whole families and towns .
Sevillana choreography is very stable and knowing it is very useful , since it is a festival dance .
 This is why those intending to dance flamenco usually start by learning Sevillanas ; This are easier to master and there are more occasions for practice and training .
 The rhythm of Sevillanas can be interpreted as 3/4 , although it is generally 6/8 .
Each sevillana is composed of 4 or sometimes 7 parts , with each part divided into 3 coplas and with each copla made up of 6 movements .
 During festivals and shows , it is often the Sevillana dancing visitors to Andalusia mistakenly take as Flamenco , as it is a vivid style , full of turns
The Petenera is a flamenco palo in a 12-beat metre , with strong beats distributed as follows : .
It is therefore identical with the 16th century Spanish dances zarabanda and the jacara .
It is believed to be a very old style of song , as it was already mentioned by writer Serafin Estebanez Calderon in the mid 19th century , and the adherence to the rhythm of the old zarabanda seems to confirm its age .
Several theories have been suggested as to its origin , although there is not enough evidence to sustain any of them unerringly :
Impetu is a flamenco guitar composition , a bulerias .
 Impetu was composed by Mario Escudero .
 Impetu was recorded by Paco de Lucia on Mario Escudero 1967 album La fabulosa guitarra de Paco de Lucia
Ronald Radford is an American Flamenco guitar player .
 Born in California , Ronald Radford currently resides in the St. Louis , Missouri area .
 Ronald Radford is a protege of Carlos Montoya , and studied classical guitar with Andres Segovia .
 Ronald Radford is the only person awarded a Fulbright Scholarship to study Flamenco in Spain , where Ronald Radford lived and traveled .
 Ronald Radford performances have spanned four continents , as well as Carnegie Hall and the Kennedy Center .
 In addition , Ronald Radford has toured as a music ambassador for the U.S. State Department
A Falseta is part of Flamenco music .
They are usually short melodies played by the guitarist in between sung verses , or to accompany dancers .
In a guitar solo , the artists play already created falsetas or improvise new falsetas which are then put together to form the whole piece .
A falseta can be roughly comparable to an improvised lick in jazz or blues music .
The Soleares , Alegrias and other palos could be explained as one measure of 6/8 time and one measure of 3/4 time , although changes of harmony tend to accent the third and tenth beat , avoiding the Western Classical idea of downbeat , and therefore further obscure the listeners ability to sense the beginning and middle of the cycle .
The Siguiriyas is the same pattern as the Soleares , but shifted : .
The Farrucas , are 2 measures of 4/4 time , the falsetas each having of 8 beats : .
Most other forms follow these two basic rhythms , though there can be considerable variation , such as in the Granaina
Paco de Lucena , born Franscico Diaz Fernandez was a Spanish guitarist , and one of the most influential flamenco players of the late nineteenth century .
He influenced a number of classical and flamenco guitarists , who emerged early in the twentieth century as interest in the guitar revived .
Paco de Lucena died when Andres Segovia was five .
 When Andres Segovia began playing , a year later , Andres Segovia first guitar was one played by Lucena .
On May 27-31 a 150th anniversary of Lucenas birth was celebrated with a flamenco concert in Lucena Castle
Antonio Fernandez Diaz known as Fosforito , is a flamenco singer and winner of the fifth Golden Key of flamenco singing .
Only five of these have been awarded since the awards inception in 1862 .
 Only five of these previous winners were Tomas El Nitri , Manuel Vallejo , Antonio Mairena , and Camaron de la Isla
 Angel Sampedro Montero , better known as Angelillo , was a Spanish singer of popular songs in Sampedro Montero time .
 Sampedro Montero has been described as a popular idol of the flamenco copla , a very particular style of flamenco , along with fandangos , soleares , saetas , caracoles and tarantas etc. .
 Sampedro Montero was also one of the earliest singers to sing in a forced falsetto in flamenco .
 Sampedro Montero was also an actor in musical films of Andalusian folklore : Sampedro Montero appeared in films such as La hija de Juan Simon and Suspiros de Triana , becoming a film star for Filmofono and working with esteemed directors such as Luis Bunuel , which led to Luis Bunuel being nicknamed `` the nightingale of Andalusia '' .
 Angelillo was one of the most outspoken advocates of the Republic , with communist ideologies .
 Angelillo fled to Oran and from there , accompanied by Sabicas , to Argentina , where Angelillo quickly gained immense popularity .
 Angelillo returned to Spain in the 1950s
Antonio Ruiz Soler , was a Spanish flamenco dancer , choreographer and dance director .
 Antonio Ruiz Soler was professionally known as Antonio Ruiz Soler or Antonio Ruiz Soler el bailarin .
 With Antonio Ruiz Soler cousin Rosario he had a partnership which was world-famous for 25 years -LRB- 1928-1953 .
 Antonio or Antonio were billed as Antonio Ruiz Soler and Rosario he .
 In 1953 Antonio Ruiz Soler formed Antonio Ruiz Soler own Spanish ballet company , Antonio Ruiz Soler and the Ballets de Madrid , and Rosario he also formed a company , partnered by Iglesias .
 Antonio Ruiz Soler choreographed many works in Spanish and classical style ; several were taken up by other companies
 Rosita Serrano was a Chilean singer who had Rosita Serrano biggest success in Nazi Germany between the 1930s and the early 1940s .
 Because of Rosita Serrano bell-like voice and pitch-perfect whistling Rosita Serrano received the nickname Chilenische Nachtigall .
Rosita Serano was born in Vina del Mar , Chile on 10 June 1914 .
 Rosita Serano father Hector Aldunate was in the diplomatic service .
 With Rosita Serano mother Sofia del Campo who was a popular opera singer Rosita Serano moved to Europe in the early 1930s .
Initially they lived in Portugal and France but by 1936 they moved to Berlin .
 Rosita Serrano had Rosita Serrano first successes in the Wintergarten and the Metropol Theater where Rosita Serrano performed Chilean folk songs .
 During that time Rosita Serrano was discovered by German composer Peter Kreuder who managed that Rosita Serrano got a record contract at the German Telefunken .
 Henceforth Rosita Serrano performed in the German language including popular songs like Roter Mohn , Schon die Musik , Kuss mich , bitte , bitte , kuss mich , Und die Schon die Musik spielt dazu , Der Onkel Jonathan , and Der kleine Liebesvogel .
 By 1938 Rosita Serrano received roles in the revue films Es leuchten die Sterne , Bel Ami , Der vierte kommt nicht , Die kluge Schwiegermutter , Herzensfreud - Herzensleid and Anita und der Teufel .
 Rosita Serrano appearance in Herzensfreud - Herzensleid was in a co-starring role with actor Paul Hoerbiger .
 Between film shoots , Rosita Serrano went on tour with two popular dance orchestras , one led by Kurt Hohenberger and the other by Teddy Stauffer .
 Due to the intercession of Joseph Goebbels , Rosita Serrano got gigs in the radio show Wunschkonzert fur die Wehrmacht .
 In 1940 Rosita Serrano recorded the very popular song La Paloma , heard throughout Germany .
 Rosita Serrano voice style was mainly operatic coloratura soprano with a deep , fast vibrato .
 Rosita Serrano added frequent embellishments such as soaring arpeggiation and melisma .
 Some songs were recorded with a few words whispered or spoken , and Rosita Serrano occasionally emphasized words with a gritty , growling jazz style reminiscent of African-American blues singer Ethel Waters .
 Rosita Serrano was a pitch-perfect whistler in the manner of Bing Crosby .
 The songs Rosita Serrano recorded in German and Spanish varied from folk to pop , including flamenco , rumba , tango and mambo .
 In 1943 while on tour in Sweden , Rosita Serrano was accused by Germany of being a spy -- Rosita Serrano had donated a benefit performance to Jewish refugees .
 Rather than returning to Germany to be arrested , Rosita Serrano traveled to her native Chile .
 Rosita Serrano songs were subsequently banned in Nazi Germany .
 Rosita Serrano attempted a tour in the United States , but Rosita Serrano German repertoire was not popular .
 Rosita Serrano appeared on The Ed Sullivan Show in 1950 , but little came of the publicity .
 In 1951 , Rosita Serrano went to West Germany to take part in the film Schwarze Augen , in which Schwarze Augen played a Cuban singer , and the next year Rosita Serrano sang in the film Saison in Salzburg .
 Beyond these appearances , Rosita Serrano saw little success in Germany , ending with a poorly received tour with Kurt Hohenberger in 1957 .
 In Rosita Serrano native her native Chile , where Rosita Serrano spent the last years of Rosita Serrano life , the public never forgave Rosita Serrano for performing in Nazi Germany .
 Rosita Serrano died in poverty in Santiago on 6 April 1997 .
Serranos performance of La Paloma was used in the 1981 film Das Boot by Wolfgang Petersen , and in the 1993 production of the film The House of the Spirits , after the novel by Chilean author Isabel Allende
Nelida Tirado is an American flamenco dancer based in New York .
 Born in the Bronx , Nelida Tirado began Nelida Tirado training with Ballet Hispanico of New York when Nelida Tirado was six years old .
 Nelida Tirado later joined Jose Molina Bailes Espanoles with which Nelida Tirado toured the United States .
 Nelida Tirado then joined Carlota Santanas Flamenco Vivo where Nelida Tirado was a soloist and dance captain .
 Nelida Tirado was a member of the Spanish Ballet at the New York Metropolitan Opera .
 Nelida Tirado received a grant from the New York Foundation for the Arts as Artist in Residence in 1997 .
 Nelida Tirado has danced in Carmen at the New York Metropolitan Opera , been a featured performer in Riverdance on Broadway , and danced with the flamenco group Noche Flamenca .
 The small but potent dancer was described by a reviewer in the New York Times as dancing as if The small but potent dancer body were a medium for some unearthly force .
 Nelida Tirado was named one of 25 to Watch by Dance Magazine in 2007 .
 Nelida Tirado also won a 2007 BRIO award for dance

Quien maneja mi barca ?
was the Spanish entry in the Eurovision Song Contest 1983 , performed in Spanish by flamenco singer Remedios Amaya .
Musically the song is in the late 70s - early 80s genre flamenco-rock , also referred to as New Flamenco , which fused Spains Arabic , Andalusian , Sephardic and Gypsy heritage with contemporary Anglosaxon pop and rock instrumentation , in this case from 80s synth pop ; with the exception of bass and electric guitar the studio recording of ?
Quien maneja mi barca ?
has a soundscape predominantly made up of drum machines , synthesizers and vocoders .
 When performed live at Eurovision in Munich these were however replaced by live drums , brass and woodwind .
Lyrically the song mirrors the musics dramatic nature , focussing on emotions of love , passion and jealousy by posing a series of metaphorical questions .
The central theme is : Who sails my boat ?
 The central theme drifting away from me .
Tell me , who sails my boat ?
 and in the verses : Your mothers braids , tell me , who Your mothers braids them ?

 In the bridge Amaya confesses : Whatever you ask of me , Ill give Ill to you .
and then returns to the songs central question ; Who sails my boat ?

 Remedios Amayas performance of the song on stage in Munich , singing with the traditional Spanish cantaora technique and dancing barefoot , was at the time described by BBC commentator Terry Wogan as tempestuous and very , very ethnic indeed .
The song was performed 7th on the night , following Turkey s Cetin Alp and The Short Waves with Opera and preceding the Switzerland s Mariella Farre with Io cosi non ci sto .
At the close of voting , it had received 0 points , placing 19th in a field of 20 .
It was succeeded as Spanish representative at the 1984 contest by Bravo with Lady , Lady
Gipsy Kings is an album by the French Rumba Catalana band Gipsy Kings , which was released in 1988 .
It is their first true studio album that rose them to a wider audience .
It went gold across France , UK , USA and other countries .
The US and European versions of this album are identical except in some cases the song order may differ .
The Japanese version released in 1995 though also includes a different version of Vamos A Bailar from their latest albums .
The song Inspiration from this album famously appeared in the Season five episode of Miami Vice , World Of Trouble , in June 1988
Carmen Linares is the stage name of Carmen Pacheco Rodriguez .
 Born in 1951 in Carmen Linares , Jaen Province , Jaen Province is known as one of the finest flamenco singers in Spain .
 Jaen Province came to Madrid with Jaen Province family in 1965 .
 Jaen Province professional career began in the dance company of Carmen Mora , and Jaen Province made Jaen Province first recording in 1970 .
 Jaen Province was awarded Spains Premio Nacional de Musica for interpretation in 2001
Manitas de Plata is a French Gitano flamenco guitarist .
 Manitas de Plata , who was illiterate was born in a Gypsy caravan in Sete in southern France .
 Manitas de Plata , who was illiterate became famous by playing each year at the Saintes-Maries-de-la-Mer Gypsy pilgrimage in Camargue , where Manitas de Plata , who was illiterate was recorded live by Deben Bhattacharya .
Manitas de Plata only agreed to play in public ten years after the death of Django Reinhardt , unanimously considered the king of gypsy guitarists .
 One of his recordings earned Manitas de Plata , who was illiterate a letter by Jean Cocteau acclaiming Jean Cocteau as a creator .
 Upon hearing Manitas de Plata , who was illiterate play at Arles in 1964 , Pablo Picasso is said to have exclaimed that man is of greater worth than I am !
and proceeded to draw on the guitar .
 Manitas de Plata became really famous only after a photography exhibition in New York , organized by Manitas de Plata , who was illiterate friend Lucien Clergue .
 Manitas de Plata , who was illiterate had recorded Manitas de Plata , who was illiterate first official album in the chapel of Arles , France in southern France , in 1963 , for the Phillips label .
It was also later re-released , in 1967 , by the Connoisseur Society Label and sold through the Book of the Month Club .
 This was a popular LP that brought Manitas de Plata , who was illiterate to the attention of an American audience .
 An American manager obtained a booking for An American manager to play a concert in Carnegie Hall in New York in December 1965 .
In New York , Manitas de Plata , who was illiterate , represented Europe at the yearly gala of the United Nations .
Since 1967 Manitas de Plata has been touring the whole world and recording discs .
 Manitas de Plata , who was illiterate played with the dancer Nina Corti .
 In 1968 Manitas de Plata , who was illiterate played at the Royal Variety Performance in London .
 Despite the fact that Manitas de Plata was famous , Manitas de Plata , who was illiterate was also known for disrespecting certain rhythmic rules that are traditional in flamenco .
Manitas de Plata is the father of Jacques , Maurice , and Tonino Baliardo and uncle to Paul , Francois , Patchai , Nicolas and Andre Reyes , all members of the world-famous Rumba Flamenca musicians , Gipsy Kings .
 Australian multi-instrumentalist Chris Freeman , Chris Freeman student in 1971 , acknowledged de Platas influence and teachings .
Note : Juerga !
 was recorded in Arles , France , southern France , in October 1963 , and featured Jose Reyes and Manero Ballardo , and the gypsies of Les Saintes Maries de la Mer .
Producer E. Alan Silver ; recording Engineer David B. Jones .
A Connoisseur Society Recording
The Fountain Theatre is one of the premier intimate theatres in Los Angeles .
 Along with The Fountain Theatre programming of live theatre , its also the foremost producer of flamenco on the West Coast .
The Fountain Theatre was founded in Los Angeles in 1990 by co-artistic directors Deborah Lawlor and Stephen Sachs .
Simon Levy , producing director and dramaturg , joined the Fountain in 1993 as a resident director , producer , and playwright .
The theatre is dedicated to providing a nurturing , creative home for multi-ethnic theatre and dance artists .
 The Fountain Theatre mission is to develop provocative new works and also to explore a unique vision of established plays that reflect the concerns and cultural diversity of contemporary Los Angeles and the U.S. .
The Fountain offers a safe , supportive haven for artists of varied backgrounds to gather , interact , and inspire each other toward the creation of work that will ignite and illuminate the community from which it is drawn , and give creative voice to those who may not otherwise be heard .
The theatre is housed in a charming two-story complex at 5060 Fountain Avenue in Hollywood , California , and has grown into one of the most successful intimate theaters in Los Angeles .
The Fountain Theatres activities include a year-round season of fully produced new and established plays .
It has mounted 35 world premieres ; and also 31 U.S. , West Coast , Southern California or Los Angeles premieres , each reflecting a unique cultural voice and serving a distinctive ethnic community .
The Fountain also offers a full season of multi-ethnic dance , the foremost presenters of flamenco in Los Angeles , a new plays developmental series , educational outreach programs , and national/international tours .
Fountain Theatre projects have been seen in Los Angeles , New York , San Francisco , Santa Barbara , Seattle , Chicago , Massachusetts , Florida , New Jersey , Minneapolis , London and Edinburgh , among other cities and countries .
The Fountain Theatre showcases flamenco every month , and is the foremost producer of flamenco on the West Coast .
The theatre is featured prominently in the 2011 documentary , .
Live performances and interviews with flamenco dancers and musicians filmed in the theatre are presented , and co-artistic director Deborah Lawlor is also interviewed in the film .
Fountain Theatre productions have won more than 220 awards for all areas of production , performance , and design .
The Fountain Theatre has received more nominations and won more awards than any other intimate theater in the history of the Ovation Awards .
The Fountain has been honored with a Certificate of Appreciation from the Los Angeles City Council for demonstrating years of artistic excellence and enhancing the cultural life of Los Angeles .
 the Fountain was the recipient of the 2004 Hollywood Arts Councils Charlie Award for Live Theatre and Significant Artistic Contribution to Hollywood .
In 2009 , the LA Weekly named the Fountain Theatre as one of the Best Theatre Companies of the Decade .
In 2011 , Broadway World said , The Fountain Theatre is by the far the best and the brightest that Los Angeles has to offer .
In 2012 the Wall Street Journal declared The Fountain Theatre is one of this countrys best intimate regional houses
 Enrique Jimenez Fernandez , known as Enrique el Mellizo was a famous flamenco singer , the most influential one in the development of the La Perla de Cadiz flamenco styles .
 Together with Silverio Franconetti and Antonio Chacon , Silverio Franconetti is considered to be one of the most important figures in the development of flamenco .
 Silverio Franconetti was the author of one of the most important malaguena styles , and is reported to have created or developed some styles of Soleares , Alegrias , and Tangos .
 An oral tradition also states that Silverio Franconetti was the creator of the Tientos .
 According to Silverio Franconetti birth certificate , Silverio Franconetti was born in La Perla de Cadiz , the son of Antonio Jimenez , slaughterman .
 The name of the mother is omitted , noting that Silverio Franconetti was an illegitimate son .
 In spite of Silverio Franconetti nickname Angel Enrique el Mellizo , Silverio Franconetti had no twin brothers , but inherited the nickname of Silverio Franconetti father .
 Silverio Franconetti inherited Silverio Franconetti fathers profession , and performed only occasionally in the cafes cantante in La Perla de Cadiz , refusing to become a professional .
 Silverio Franconetti never travelled out of Silverio Franconetti native town .
 Nevertheless , Silverio Franconetti fame grew in all Andalusia , and singers from other towns travelled to La Perla de Cadiz to hear Silverio Franconetti .
 According to some testimonies , Silverio Franconetti had a moody character .
 Although Silverio Franconetti was normally a sociable character , Silverio Franconetti fell into crises in which Silverio Franconetti escaped all company in solitary places .
 Silverio Franconetti died at 58 years old , of tuberculosis .
 Although at the time of Silverio Franconetti death , some flamenco recordings have already been done , Silverio Franconetti never went into a recording studio .
 Silverio Franconetti styles , though , were preserved by other singers , mainly from La Perla de Cadiz , who knew them directly or indirectly .
 Silverio Franconetti legacy has been kept alive by singers like Silverio Franconetti brothers Enrique and Antonio Jimenez , Aurelio Selle , El Nino de la Isla , Manolo Vargas , La Perla de Cadiz , Chaqueton , Pericon de La Perla de Cadiz , Manolo Caracol , Chano Lobato and many others .
 The main creation of El Mellizo was Angel Enrique el Mellizo malaguena , totally innovative at the time , which approximated this style , originally not linked to gypsies , to the more gypsy style of singing .
 According to tradition , Angel Enrique el Mellizo created that malaguena style after a love disappointment in which Angel Enrique el Mellizo fell into one of his periods of solitary wandering .
 During that time , Angel Enrique el Mellizo went into a church and was inspired by a priest singing the preface to the Catholic mass .
 In remembrance of this , the preface of the mass is sometimes sung nowadays as an introduction to Angel Enrique el Mellizo malaguena .
The style certainly bears some reminiscence to a liturgic chant .
According to the opinion of critics , it was Enrique el Mellizo who first sang the malaguena as a cante libre , that is , without a definite metre or rhythmic regular pattern .
Other contributions that are attributed to him are the following : .
ALVAREZ CABALLERO , Angel Enrique el Mellizo , un gigante in El cante flamenco , Alianza Editorial , Madrid , 1998 .
MARTIN SALAZAR , Jorge : Los cantes flamencos , Diputacion provincial de Granada
 Lawson Rollins is an American guitarist and composer from North Carolina noted for Lawson Rollins virtuoso fingerstyle technique and melodic compositional skills featured in Lawson Rollins recordings .
 Lawson Rollins music spans a wide range of genres but is generally classed as Latin Jazz and World Music , with elements of Samba , Bossanova , Middle Eastern music , Classical guitar , Flamenco and Shred guitar added to the mix .
 Lawson Rollins often employs extremely fast minor scales and diminished scale solo runs to Lawson Rollins compositions which are diligently executed in the flamenco picado style , often blazing arpeggios across the fretboard using Lawson Rollins fingers , a technically highly difficult feat for most guitarists .
 Lawson Rollins is best known for Lawson Rollins compositions The Fire Cadenza , Santa Ana Wind , Daybreak , Infinita , Espirito , Elevation , and Moonlight Samba and Lawson Rollins albums Infinita , Espirito , Elevation , Espirito , Elevation and Full Circle which were all critically acclaimed by the jazz and guitar communities .
 Lawson Rollins has reached a wide audience on both radio and the internet .
Video performances of Locomotion , The Fire Cadenza and Santa Ana Wind have been viewed millions of times on Youtube .
 Youtube songs Daybreak , Moonlight Samba , Infinita , Espirito , Elevation , and Havana Heat have proven popular on jazz radio stations and landed on the Billboard Top radio charts .
 Youtube album Full Circle landed on the Billboard Top 10 World Music album sales chart .
 Influenced by Andres Segovia from Youtube mid-teens , he developed an interest in Jazz , Flamenco , and improvisational Latin and Brazilian guitar styles in his early twenties .
After graduating from Duke University he earned a graduate degree from the London School of Economics , then moved to Washington , D.C. in 1998 where he met guitarist Daniel Young at a local flamenco shop and formed the Latin guitar fusion group Young & Rollins .
They released several albums together , including Salsa Flamenca , which landed on the Billboard Chart in 2000 , Sevilla , Esperanza and Mosaic and played at many major venues such as the Kennedy Center and Sydney Opera House .
 Lawson Rollins was based in Washington until 2007 when Lawson Rollins moved to San Francisco .
 Lawson Rollins four solo albums Infinita , Espirito , Elevation , Espirito , Elevation , and Full Circle are characterized by an eclectic mix of Middle Eastern , Brazilian , and Arabic music fused with Spanish guitar and backed by an all-star cast of musicians from around the world including Brazilian singer Flora Purim , percussionist Airto Moreira , Cuban drummer Horacio Hernandez , Shahin Shahida of Shahin and Sepehr , Iranian kamancheh player Kayhan Kalhor , Grammy-winning violinist Charlie Bisharat , and electric guitarist Buckethead , among others .
 Lawson Rollins is a voting member of NARAS and owner of the independent world music record label Infinita Records
Tonino Baliardo is the lead guitarist for Gipsy Kings , a New Flamenco group from France that has sold more than 18 million albums worldwide .
 Tonino Baliardo was born in Montpelier .
 Most Gipsy Kings albums have 3-5 instrumental cuts - all written entirely by Baliardo ; Tonino Baliardo also co-writes their vocal numbers .
 After Tonino Baliardo 2001 solo debut , Essences , Tonino Baliardo released an instrumental album under Tonino Baliardo own name in 2003 , all Tonino Baliardo own originals .
Tonino is the most creative person in the band , said Chico Bouchikhi , a former member who co-wrote their biggest hit to date , Bamboleo .
 Tonino has lots of ideas and a great imagination .
 Tonino used to go to school with Tonino guitar .
 Baliardo - like Tonino bandmates - does not read or write music , Tonino said in a 2007 behind-the-scenes video about their album Pasajero .
They developed their styles from a lifetime of playing , and years learning from the generations that came before and contributed so much to flamenco music
Desde El Principio is the twelfth studio album by Spanish duo Azucar Moreno , released on Sony International in 2004 .
The album saw the Salazar sisters joining forces with a new production team ; drummer and percussionist Sergio Castillo and keyboardist Francisco Amat .
 Sergio Castillo and keyboardist Francisco Amat began their career in music in the early 1980s and had previously produced albums with among others Cuban singer Silvio Rodriguez , Tunisian - French Dany Brillant , and in the late 90s and early 2000s most notably the young Spanish rumba-rock duo Estopa to great success .
Productionwise Desde El Principio marked a return to Azucar Morenos winning formula of the early 90s in that it mixed mainstream Latin pop with material from a wide variety of genres .
Tracks like Sangre Espanola , Me Quedo Contigo and Vamos a Dejarlo Asi mainly featured drums , percussion and Spanish guitars , recorded live , while lead single Mi Ritmo was a typical Azucar Moreno dance track with a more synthesized and contemporary urban sound .
Just like 1991s Mambo the album also featured flamenco / dance covers of a number of pop classics like Dont Let Me Be Misunderstood , a hit for both Nina Simone and The Animals in the 60s and also turned into disco classic by Santa Esmeralda in 1977 , the Neapolitan traditional !
Oh Sole Mio !
 , also covered by Elvis Presley in English as Oh Sole Mio Now Or Never , but , Azucar Morenos large LGBT following in both Europe and South America considered , most importantly their take on Gloria Gaynor s 1979 gay anthem Me Will Survive , retitled the follow-ups Sobrevivire .
Despite this Desde El Principio proved to be a modest commercial success .
 Mi Ritmo was somewhat surprisingly the first Azucar Moreno lead single since the late 1980s to be issued without any accompanying dance remixes , and the follow-ups Sobrevivire , Se Me Va and El were never commercially released , but only as promo singles distributed to radio stations and disc jockeys - again without any remixes ; in Spain the album sold some 50.000 copies , making Spain their first studio album since 1988s Carne De Melocoton not to go platinum or multi-platinum in their home country .
Desde El Principio also came to be the duos final album for the Sony Music Entertainment label , a company they after a series of mergers in various forms had been signed to for some fifteen years .
In 2006 Azucar Moreno returned to their previous label EMI Music for the album Bailando Con Lola .
While Sony Music have continued to release hits compilations with Azucar Moreno all through the 2000s , such as Toda La Pasion De Azucar Moreno , Coleccion De Oro , 20 Grandes Exitos , Los Esenciales and 20 Exitos Originales , as well as numerous mid-price collections , none of these include any new recordings , remixes or tracks not to be found on the duos ten studio albums for the CBS/Epic/Sony label , several of the duos greatest hits do however appear in edited form
Nino Josele is a Spanish guitarist , and exponent of the New Flamenco style .
 a Spanish guitarist first two albums show a vibrant , pure , modern flamenco style .
 a Spanish guitarist then released a tribute to Bill Evans music via a Spanish guitarist album Paz , showing a Spanish guitarist versatility as a musician .
 Having originated in a flamenco background , Nino Josele adapts to complicated jazz music themes as well as creating a Spanish guitarist own mixture of various genres in a Spanish guitarist own compositions .
 a Spanish guitarist has participated in the award-winning short film Almendros los Plaza Nueva and La sombra de las cuerdas 2009 , a portrait of the guitar genius El Nino Miguel
Angela Vargas Vega , better known by her artistic name of Angelita Vargas is a Spanish flamenco dancer , considered one of the greatest stars of the Andalusian music scene .
New York Magazine said that she uses her legs like a compass -- one foot pivoting in place while the other delicately taps out a circle -- a second time , the specialty seems to degenerate into a trick .
She is married to El Biencasao , and is the mother of dancer Joselito .
Dancing since the age of 3 , by 8 she was performing in a group called La Gitanilla throughout Spain .
She performed in a group at Expo 98 .
She has performed in Great Britain , North America , Japan , Netherlands and Germany and is a recipient of the Premio Pastora Imperio and the Premio Nacional al baile de la Catedra de Flamencologia
Rafael Ojeda Rojas alias Falete is a gypsy flamenco singer from Seville , Spain .
 Rafael Ojeda Rojas father is a member of the musical group Cantores de Hispalis , and he made his debut in the Teatro Lope de Vega , Seville when he was 15 years old , dedicating his performance to La Chunga .
In the 1990s , he took part in several event in different cities all over the world .
He has been promoted by various celebrities , like the journalist Jesus Quintero and in his discography , he makes versions of famous songs of singers like Bambino , Rocio Jurado , Chavela Vargas and Paco Ibanez
 Nino Ricardo , born as Manuel Serrapi , was a Flamenco composer , considered by some sources as the most accomplished flamenco player of his stage-name Nino Ricardo day .
 his stage-name Nino Ricardo played a significant part in the evolution of the flamenco guitar .
 his stage-name Nino Ricardo lived in the city center of Sevilla .
 A child guitar prodigy , A child guitar prodigy early audiences referred to A child guitar prodigy as the son of his stage-name Nino Ricardo , leading to A child guitar prodigy stage-name Nino Ricardo .
 A child guitar prodigy career began in 1924 by accompanying La Nina de los Peines .
 A child guitar prodigy fingernails grew in a peculiar upward curve , a fact that influenced A child guitar prodigy playing style and tone .
 After a throat operation in 1945 , A child guitar prodigy acquired a deep , raspy voice that is audible on recordings in which A child guitar prodigy hums along and offers encouraging remarks to the singer .
 his stage-name Nino Ricardo was influenced by fellow flamenco players , including : Pinto , Torre , El Nino Gloria , Escacena , and Antonio Mairena .
 his stage-name Nino Ricardo spent his stage-name Nino Ricardo early years playing in the taverns and bars of Seville where his stage-name Nino Ricardo developed his stage-name Nino Ricardo own personal style and created much of his stage-name Nino Ricardo own material .
 his stage-name Nino Ricardo was inspired by the great threesome of flamenco guitar ; Ramon Montoya , Manolo de Huelva , and Javier Molina , by whom his stage-name Nino Ricardo was guided at the start of his stage-name Nino Ricardo professional career in the Salon Variedades in Seville .
 his stage-name Nino Ricardo recorded with many singers , including Pastora , El Carbonerillo , Mazaco , Antonio Mairena and Manuel Mairena , Fernanda y Bernarda , Caracol and Talega .
 Born as Manuel Serrapi on 11 July 1904 , Manuel Serrapi on 11 was one of two children .
 The son of his stage-name Nino Ricardo and Carmen Serrapi , The son of Ricardo and Carmen Serrapi was born in southern Spain and began playing guitar as a young child .
 The son of Ricardo and Carmen Serrapi married Lola Siguenza in The son of Ricardo and Carmen Serrapi early twenties and had two children with Lola Siguenza in his early twenties .
 The son of Ricardo and Carmen Serrapi reportedly had several affairs with other women while touring , thus there are two more children The son of Ricardo and Carmen Serrapi is considered to be the father of .
Nino Ricardo died of cirrhosis of the liver in 1972 at the age of 68 .
In 2004 , celebrations of the 100 years since the birth of Nino Ricardo were held in southern Spain .
According to the book Flamenco : Gypsy Dance and Music from Andalusia by Claus Schreiner , the period after the Spanish Civil War and World War II flamenco guitar music was largely dominated by the style of performers like Nino Ricardo and Sabicas .
Many modern flamenco guitarists were influenced by Ricardo such as Paco de Lucia , Paco Pena and Juan Martin
Malaguenas is one of the traditional styles of Andalusian music , derived from earlier types of fandango from the area of Malaga , classified among the Cantes de Levante .
Originally a folk-song type , it became a flamenco style in the 19th century .
It is not normally used for dance , as it is generally interpreted with no regular rhythmic pattern , as a cante libre .
It has a very rich melody with virtuous flourishes and use of microtones .
Its guitar accompaniment is normally played in open position first inversion giving E for the tonic , which can be transposed by using a capo .
Malaguenas derive from local variety of the Fandangos , a type of dance that , with different regional variations and even different names , became very popular in great part of Spain in the 18th century .
Although nowadays malaguenas are a typical instance of cante libre , performed at libitum and normally not used for the dance , folkloric fandangos were originally sung and played at a fast speed , with a rhythmic pattern in 6/8 , to accompany dance .
 Some of these primitive fandangos from Malaga , called Verdiales are still performed nowadays at folkloric gatherings by large non-professional groups called Pandas , which use a high number of guitars , bandurrias , violins , and tambourines .
Towards the second half of the 19th century , some interpreters gave the first steps in transforming this folkloric songs into real flamenco .
They slowed it down , they enriched the melody with flourishes and ornaments and reduced accompanying instruments to a single guitar .
In this process , they were probably influenced by other flamenco styles , but modern research also suggests that the influence of Opera , Zarzuela and other classical music styles also played a part in this development .
The oldest malaguena of this type that has been preserved to our days is probably the Jabera .
This was first mentioned by writer Serafin Estebanez Calderon , probably in the 1840s .
According to this contemporary witness , this type of malaguena would have been created by an artist known as La Jabera .
This early malaguena type still preserved a rhythmic pattern as those of later artists like Juan Breva .
Most of the malaguena types were created in the last decades of the 19th century .
The third step in the evolution was the total loss of a rhythmic pattern .
 This development was brought forward by singers like Antonio Chacon , Enrique el Mellizo and guitarists like Ramon Montoya , none of whom had been born in the area of Malaga , so they had not grown in contact with the original folkloric fandangos .
They were in a sense , creators of a completely new style , fashioned by professional or semi-professional artists .
Some of the traditional malaguena styles more frequently performed are listed below .
 Many though , have been omitted as Many though are rarely performed or are just variations of other main styles .
1 .
Juan Breva .
 Juan Breva . recorded three of his malaguena styles personally in the early 20th century .
2 .
 Enrique el Mellizo .
 Enrique el Mellizo . is often said that Enrique derived Enrique malaguena from the preface to the catholic mass .
 After Enrique influence , the rhythmic pattern of the malaguena guitar accompaniment was lost and it became a cante libre .
Among the interpreters of this style who helped to establish it we may mention El Nino de la Isla , Aurelio Selle , Manolo Caracol and Pericon de Cadiz .
Each of them has added personal touches to the Malaguena , so it is difficult to know which one resembles the original model most .
3 .
El Canario .
 El Canario . created one style of the Jabera .
4 .
Antonio Chacon .
 Antonio Chacon . was the most prolific creator of malaguenas and the styles Antonio Chacon . created are probably the most frequent in recordings .
 The number of the malaguenas Antonio Chacon . created varies , though , as some have been attributed to him only by tradition .
Some of these styles can often be seen as simple variations .
Most of these styles were already recorded by him between 1909 and 1928 .
5 .
La Trini .
Her legacy was preserved by singers like Sebastian el Pena .
Antonio Chacon created a personal variation of one of her styles .
 Originally the guitar was , together with other instruments , already part of the accompaniment of folkloric fandango of Malaga .
At that time its function was merely rhythmic and limited to the use of one technique , the strumming pattern called abandolao .
As malaguenas slowed down their tempo and professional guitarists came into place , short solos and ornaments were incorporated .
The great revolution of the malaguena guitar playing came together with its transformation into a cante libre : flamenco virtuosos like Ramon Montoya started introducing classical guitar techniques like arpeggio , scales , tremolo , and enriched it with a wider variety of chord positions .
They also started introducing short guitar solos in between verses , called falsetas in the flamenco jargon , following the model of other flamenco songs .
 the Jabera is rarely performed as a guitar instrumental piece and very rarely danced .
The singing develops on a major mode , resolving in the corresponding Phrygian mode of the same scale .
 The Phrygian mode is used for the short interludes after of before verses .
The usual progression is the typical of all fandangos : .
To this typical progression other transition chords can be added .
For example , D7 is often used in the transition to G Major .
A minor often appears in guitar interludes .
These chords can also be transported by using a capo on the guitar , maintaining the same chord positions .
Its melodies are normally lyric in style and very ornate .
 the Jabera has traditionally been favoured by mellow voices , but there are many exceptions to this rule .
Quite often , flamenco singers , after singing a several verses of malaguena in cante libre style , link directly with the more vivid styles of Fandangos abandolaos
The Spanish term Cantes a palo seco refers to a category of flamenco palos traditionally sung a cappella or , in some cases , with some sort of percussion .
The category comprises the following palos : .
In fact , almost any palo can be sung unaccompanied , especially in private juergas , where there is often no guitarist available .
Even in professional settings , some palos which are normally accompanied by the guitar , like seguiriya , bulerias , or even solea , are sometimes heard a palo seco
The Paco de Lucia Sextet is a flamenco music sextet , formed by renowned guitarist Paco de Lucia and other musicians .
The band has released three albums .
 In 1990 Paco de Lucia released Zyryab , an album made with The Paco de Lucia Sextet sextet and also featuring jazz pianist Chick Corea
Manuel Ortega Juarez .
, was a flamenco cantaor .
Born in Seville , Spain , he was descended from a long line of flamenco artists including Enrique Ortega and Curro Dulce , and he was possibly related to El Planeta and El Fillo .
 The family was also known for Spain bull fighters .
 Under the stage name El Caracol , the stage name El Caracol gained international fame as much for the stage name El Caracol flamboyant personality as for the stage name El Caracol extraordinary cante .
 Later the stage name El Caracol juergas became notorious .
Although as a singer he always retained the ability to deliver the core of the traditional art , he was not ashamed to commercialize flamenco to attract a mass popularity ; then he gained fame and fortune , as well as adding to a checkered reputation .
For the most part , this was during what was later widely known as a decadent age in the history of the art , the age of Opera flamenca .
In 1922 as a youth , he had been awarded the first prize at the Concurso de Cante Jondo de Granada , organized by intellectuals like Manuel de Falla and Federico Garcia Lorca .
However , in the first stage of his career , he made a living singing mostly at private parties , which at the time , were , together with cafes , the usual stages for flamenco artists .
During the Spanish Civil War , he started touring with theatre companies as : owing to the war , private parties were difficult to find .
 This kind of theatre show , very common at the time was a musical with commonplace love stories set in Andalusian or gypsy context and Andalusian or gypsy context musical pieces were usually a mixture of Spanish popular song called copla andaluza or cancion espanola .
 In 1943 , Andalusian met Lola Flores , with whom Andalusian started an intense professional and emotional relationship .
 They became the most popular artistic couple in Spain during the forties , spreading their fame even to several Spanish American countries .
 His most popular songs in the field of copla andaluza , which he used to call zambra , date from that time : songs like La salvaora and La nina de fuego became immensely famous in Spain .
He also took part in several films such as Un caballero famoso , Embrujo , Jack el Negro and La nina de la venta .
Although sometimes criticized by a very orthodox section of the flamenco public , he is usually considered as one of the singers that better represent Duende .
He possessed a deep , earthy , yet warm voice , and delivered the flamenco cantes with passion , originality , and extremely personal phrasing .
He excelled in a wide variety of flamenco styles , including Martinetes , Seguiriyas , Solea , Malaguenas , Bulerias and Fandangos , among others .
 His renderings of Fandangos Caracoleros , in particular , were so personal that they have come to be known as Fandangos Caracoleros .
 El Caracol died in a road accident in Madrid , Spain .
 Alvarez Caballero : El Caracol true that Manolo Caracol could sink to the lowest levels , real slumps in which his singing was just a parody of El Caracol , but this often happens to cantaores of his type , who are motivated by emotional impulse , and the knowing flamenco fan knows that this can happen .
 From a regular singer like Mairena we can expect a regular singer like Mairena will always sing well ; From somebody like El Caracol you could expect anything : either a regular singer like Mairena was a disaster or a regular singer like Mairena was an absolute genius .
 Anselmo Gonzalez Climent : With El Caracol , it is impossible to remain emotionally detached , from the first line , since the temple Anselmo Gonzalez Climent Anselmo Gonzalez starts running through our sensibility and invades us thoroughly .
 Anselmo Gonzalez forces us to take part until our egos are suppressed .
Ricardo Molina about Caracols anthology Una historia del cante flamenco : From the cana to the group of Malaguenas , this anthology is an evil personification of Caracol messing up the definite forms of the past .
 As happens with most flamenco artists of the past , Caracols discography is in complete disorder .
 Caracols recordings are regularly republished , but in different compilations , sometimes in careless remasterizations , by different record companies .
Una historia del cante flamenco , originally published by Hispavox in 1958 with guitarist Melchor de Marchena remains his most seminal work .
 It was republished , together with other recordings , in the compilation El genio : Manolo Caracol in the Quejio CD collection published by Hispavox in 1958 and compiled by J.M. Gamboa .
 This recording excludes El genio zambras .
For other recordings available , see links below
In music , the altered Phrygian scale or Freygish scale , featuring an unusual key signature and a distinctive augmented second interval , is the fifth mode of the harmonic minor scale , the fifth being the dominant .
 Also called the Phrygian dominant scale , harmonic minor perfect fifth below , dominant flat 2 flat 6 , or simply the fifth mode of the harmonic minor scale , the Phrygian dominant scale is constructed by raising the third scale degree of the Phrygian mode .
 the Phrygian dominant scale occurs commonly in Jewish , Greek , Turkish , Arab , Persian , and Flamenco cg music .
Examples include some versions of Hava Nagila and Misirlou , with other versions of those melodies using the closely related double harmonic scale .
The main chords used with this scale are , I , iv , and vii .
The scale is very common in Middle Eastern music , particularly Arabic and Egyptian music .
 It is also known as Ahava Rabbah or Freygish when used in Hebrew prayers and Klezmer music , as the Hijaz-Nahawand or Bayati maqam when used in Turkish or Arabic music , or as Bidad in Dastgah-e Homayoun in Persian music .
In North Indian classical music , this scale corresponds to the raga Basant Mukhari .
In South Indian classical music , this scale is known as Vakulabharanam .
 It is often known as a Spanish Phrygian scale , Spanish gypsy scale or Phrygian major scale as a Spanish Phrygian scale is also commonly used in Flamenco music .
 The flatted second together with the augmented step between the second and third degrees of the scale create The flatted second distinctive mystical , exotic sound .
 The E Phrygian dominant scale is E , F , G , A , B , C and D .
 The sequence of steps comprising the Phrygian dominant scale is .
When related to the scale degrees of the major scale , it reads like so : .
When the Freygish scale is used in Klezmer music , the 6th degree may not be flattened if it is melodically approached and left from above .
The Phrygian Dominant scale is commonly used in jazz .
 the Phrygian dominant scale is implemented in composition and improvisation primarily over altered dominant chords .
 Most commonly , Most is used on dominant seven 9 chords and dominant seven 9 13 chords .
This is due to the fact that the scale contains the 9 , major 3 , 13 and 7 tones .
Over those chords , the Phrygian Dominant scale is preferable to the commonly used Mixolydian scale and Altered scale due to matching chord tones .
 Charles Mingus featured the Phrygian dominant scale extensively in Charles Mingus compositions , including Tijuana Table Dance Dont Let Dance Dont Happen Here , and The Black Saint and the Sinner Lady .
 Franz Liszt moves down this scale twice in the closing bars of Franz Liszt B-minor Sonata
El Potito , is a Spanish flamenco and new flamenco singer .
He has been hailed as a young singer tipped to be following in the footsteps of El Camaron .
 Bernard Leblon said Bernard Leblon has a prodigious voice capable of hitting incredibly high notes , was an overnight sensation in the world of flamenco .
From a child at the age of 10 , he began acting , singing and flamenco dancing on the tourist boats on the Guadalquivir River .
As a teenager , collaborated with acclaimed artists such as Paco de Lucia .
By 1996 he had already released two albums with collaborations with Vicente Amigo and others .
He has since performed in a large number of performances internationally , collaborating in performances of Joaquin Cortes and Sara Baras , and is a singer in the Tomatito group .
Altogether he has released six albums , the last of which is Macande
Dos guitarras flamencas en stereo is the first of three collaborative albums between Paco de Lucia & Ricardo Modrego .
 The two had met while working for Jose Greco , a talent agent and flamenco dancer , and had composed most of the pieces while touring around the world with Jose Greco .
When they finally returned to Madrid , they proceeded to pitch their work to local record companies with no success .
Modregos father , however , happened to know Ricardo Fernandez de la Torre at Philips Music and got them in the door .
 Unfortunately , they had been unable to secure studio time and all they had was a poor recording they had made in Modregos home , but they pitched Recording anyway .
Six hours after dropping off the tape they received a call to come in the next day , on February 11 , 1964 and sign a two year contract that would mark the beginning of De Lucias illustrious career .
 Recording was done over two days , six pieces per day , and on only The two tracks .
Due to the limitations in the recording studio at the time , there were also no cuts , meaning a mistake or a problem with the recording equipment meant having to start over completely from scratch .
In addition , as stereo equipment was still a relatively new phenomenon , they didnt have any when the record was released and were quite angry at how bad the album sounded on their mono record player .
Modrego actually had to rent a stereo record player so they could hear it properly
Roger Scannura is a flamenco guitarist and an exponent of Nuevo Flamenco .
 Roger Scannura was born on Malta .
 Roger Scannura early schooling began at the Franciscan Monastery of St. Theresa where Roger Scannura was tutored in European history , Latin , fine art and art restoration .
 Roger Scannura has been immersed in music since early childhood and mastered the techniques and nuances of Flamenco guitar while in Spain for 12 years under the auspices of Pepe Habichuela and other gypsy masters .
 Roger Scannura has toured Europe and North America as a soloist and as a Music Director for several flamenco dance companies .
 Roger Scannura is also a founder of a small Toronto based dance company Ritmo Flamenco .
 Scannura with Roger Scannura group has performed for Prime ministers , Dignitaries as well as an assortment of celebrities including , Russell Crowe and Sting .
 Roger Scannura has recorded six CDs of original flamenco music encompassing both traditional and modern styles .
There are a number of impressive guitarists courageous enough to tacklk .
flamenco .
Few are as convincing and awe inspiring as Roger Scannura .
 Encore is a sampler from each of the Toronto-based Malta native 's four .
releases .
Each , judging by this , must be a stunner , as there is nothing .
The opening `` Burnin ' Up '' offers handclaps , dancing -LRB- Ritmo Flamenco is a. Toronto based Flamenco dance company -RRB- , violin and bass - at least .
Unfortunately , there is no credit given to the accompanying players on .
the disc .
The violinist is especially stunning .
The guitarist , it goes .
without saying , is breathtaking .
Through the eight tunes that comprise .
this delightful disc , feet play a prominent role .
As with all authentic .
flamenco , it is a marriage of the guitar and the dancer .
On the gorgeous ballad of `` Marissa , '' solo guitar takes center stage , .
though the robust dancing is never tucked too far into the background .
The melodic `` Summerwine '' is heart wrenchingly beautiful .
As on .
 `` Marissa , '' the dancing is accompanist to the player .
 `` Angelica '' is a. lilting number that showcases guitar work as fine as Angelica 've ever heard in .
any context .
Again , with no personnel listing on the insert , the players .
go un-credited .
The electric guitar that fills in here is superb .
The classic sounding `` El Ritmo '' is filled out with infectious clapping .
and dancing , and `` Colmenares , '' with its slinky flute accompaniment , .
along with the dancers , is hypnotic .
The closing `` Misterio '' again is .
made the more magical by the addition of the violinist , percussion and .
dancing .
This is a must-have for fans of flamenco music .
a gifted composer whose music is as beautiful as it is haunting .
Rarely is Flamenco guitar played so eloquently with just the right amount of passion and grace
Nuria Pomares is a dancer .
 Nuria Pomares was born in Madrid and studied Spanish and Classical ballet at the Royal High School of Dance .
 Nuria Pomares professional debut was at Lincoln Center in 1991 .
 Nuria Pomares has danced at the Teatro de la Zarzuela in Madrid and the Gran Teatre del Liceu in Barcelona .
 Nuria Pomares was a soloist with Jose Antonio y los Ballets Espanoles for one year and danced with Joaquin Cortes in Pasion Gitana for 4 years .
 Since 2002 , Nuria Pomares has danced in the opera La vida breve by Manuel de Falla under the direction of Rafael Fruhbeck de Burgos throughout the United States and Europe , including with the New York Philharmonic , the Boston Symphony Orchestra , the Los Angeles Philharmonic , the St. Petersburg Philharmonic Orchestra , and the Israel Philharmonic Orchestra .
 Nuria Pomares directs Nuria Pomares own school of dance , which Nuria Pomares founded in 1983 .
 Nuria Pomares has danced in the Washington National Opera , Placido Domingo in From my latin soul .
 Nuria Pomares is special guest israel philharmonic orchestra in Annual Gala 75th season the opera Carmen under the direction of Zubin Mehta
The Bienal de Flamenco is celebrated in Seville , Spain , in different theatres of the city .
 This festival features dancers , vocalists and guitarists direct from Spain in a display ranging from flamenco puro to innovative new works .
The festival was first celebrated in 1980 , with Jose Luis Ortiz Nuevo as the director and with a poster designed by Joaquin Saenz .
The Giraldillo was won by Calixto Sanchez
Jose Greco was a flamenco dancer and choreographer .
 Jose Greco II was born in Montorio nei Frentani , Italy of Italian parents .
 Jose Greco II real name was Costanzo Greco Bucci but Jose Greco II later changed His real name to Jose Greco .
 When Jose Greco II was 10 years old , Jose Greco II and Jose Greco II family moved to New York City .
 Jose Greco II began dancing in Brooklyn with Jose Greco II sister Norina at a young age .
 Jose Greco II made Jose Greco II professional dancing debut in 1937 at the Hippodrome Theatre in Manhattan .
 Jose Greco II most famous partners were La Argentinita and , after La Argentinita death , La Argentinita sister Pilar Lopez .
 In 1949 , Jose Greco II started the Jose Greco Dance Company , with which Jose Greco II toured extensively .
 Jose Greco II also appeared in a number of films , including Sombrero , Around the World in 80 Days , Holiday for Lovers , Ship of Fools , and The Proud and the Damned .
 In 1951 Jose Greco II made Jose Greco II first appearance in the UK at the Sadlers Wells Theatre .
 Jose Greco II received many honors and awards including being knighted by the Spanish government and receiving 4 honorary doctorates .
 Jose Greco II started the Jose Greco Foundation for Hispanic Dance in 1972 and retired from the stage for the first time in 1974 .
 Jose Greco II published an autobiography , Gypsy in My Soul : The Autobiography of Jose Greco , in 1977 .
 Jose Greco II had six children , three boys and three girls .
 Jose Greco II sons Jose Luis and Paolo are composers ; Jose Luis son Jose Greco II is a dancer as are Jose Greco II three daughters , Alessandra , Carmela and Lola .
 Jose Greco II came out of retirement in the late 1980s to form a company featuring Jose Greco II children .
 Jose Greco II appeared on stage for the last time in 1995 , at the age of 77 .
 Until Jose Greco II death Jose Greco II was Visiting Professor of Hispanic Dance in 1972 at Franklin and Marshall College in Lancaster , PA .
 Jose Greco II died of heart failure in Jose Greco II home in Lancaster , Pennsylvania .
 Jose Greco II is survived by Jose Greco II wife Margaret-Ana Borger-Greco , professor of Spanish at Millersville University
Polo is the name of a flamenco palo or musical form .
There is only one known song in this palo , which is extremely similar to another palo called cana , and its guitar accompaniment , like the cana , shares its rhythm and motifs with solea .
Both the cana and polo share the same musical mode .
In fact , the polo has usually been considered as a derivation of the cana .
To complete the singing of the polo , singers usually sing a stanza in the palo of solea , generally in the style called solea apola .
Although nowadays , only one song is known for the polo , known as polo natural , past writers also mention another polo , called polo de Tobalo , which has probably been lost .
The stanza of the polo is the cuarteta romanceada , typical of most flamenco songs and Spanish folklore : four octosyllabic verses , the second and fourth rhyming in assonance .
It is usually sung with the following typical lines : .
Often , the last line is replaced by another saying : Viva el polo de Tobalo .
 This is curious , as the melody used is not the one of the polo de polo de Tobalo , but that of the polo natural .
Some lines are partially repeated , and there are also two series of melismas sung on one vowel in the middle and at the end of the stanza , which separate the song in two sections .
 The stanza is therefore rendered like This : .
 As to the metre and musical mode , This are the same as for the solea , that is 12-beat metre and Phrygian mode .
The guitar accompaniment and falsetas are also inspired by the solea , although some special arpeggios are included after the second line of each section and during the singing of the melismas .
It is always accompanied in the guitar chord position of E for the tonic .
 Musicologist Hipolito Rossy stated that the song was in mode and 3-beat metre , but it is obvious that Musicologist Hipolito Rossy was not very familiar with this palo , as all recordings show the typical solea rhythm and Phrygian mode .
 Musicologist Hipolito Rossy might have been influenced by the recording of singer Jacinto Almaden , in which guitarist Perico el del Lunar certainly uses some chords insinuating the major mode .
The first mentions of a Gypsy polo can be found in the poem La Quincaida by the Count of Norona , written in 1779 .
 The first is also mentioned in the Cartas Marruecas , by Jose Cadalso .
Some critics argue that this was not yet the current polo , but a primitive folkloric song , which was not yet flamenco : .
the Gypsies , in the eve of flamenco , were acting on the Spanish popular rhythms and songs which , still preserving this popular quality , evolved sensibly towards an agitanamiento which will finally be evident .
 When this transition time was completed , that song , that rhythm that the Gypsies knew in Andalusia were already a different thing , Some critics were flamenco .
In the case of the polo , this did not happen until the beginning of the 19th century , if we are to accept the criteria from Molina and Mairena , and Butler .
Both the cana and the polo seem to have enjoyed great success and were considered the finest type of flamenco song at the beginning of the 19th century .
 Serafin Estebanez Calderon , in Serafin Estebanez Calderon book from 1847 Escenas andaluzas , mentioned famous singer El Planeta , as King of both polos .
 Serafin Estebanez Calderon also assured that the polo was difficult to sing and that it was derived from the cana and mentions the polo de polo de Tobalo .
The polo is widely mentioned in the literature of the 19th century .
 Most important singers at the time included it in Most important singers at the time repertoire , up to the times of Antonio Chacon , who is reported to be one of the latest great performers of this song .
Although historic sources mention two or more polos , only one variety is known for sure to have survived to our days : the polo natural .
 Singer Pepe de la Matrona recorded a version of the polo Tobalo at the end of the 1969s , but the authenticity of this recorded version has been put in doubt by several critics on the grounds that Singer Pepe could never explain who Singer Pepe had heard it from .
The only old recording with the title of polo , prior to its rediscovery in the 1950s , was made by La Rubia and it resembles the cana even more than the usual version of the polo natural .
In 1960 , at the time of reappraisal of traditional cante , the polo natural was recorded by Jacinto Almaden , in the Antologia del cante flamenco compiled by guitarist Perico el del Lunar and flamencologist Tomas Andrade de Silva .
At the time , according to the introduction the latter wrote for this anthology , singers who knew this song were extremely rare .
Since then , it has been recorded by several famous singers , but it has remained in .
There are several contradictory theories , that have been suggested regarding the origins of the polo and its varieties .
The supposed quality of the polo and its pretended quality are but an invention of writers who did not know a word about flamenco singing .
Many confused the Spanish or Spanish-American polo with the flamenco one , attributing to the latter the popularity of the other .
The following recordings are usually recommended for reference : .
ALVAREZ CABALLERO , Angel : El cante flamenco , Alianza Editorial , Madrid , 1998 .
 ANDRADE DE SILVA , Sobre los origenes de trenta y tres cantes , published as an introduction to recording Antologia del Cante Flamenco , Hispavox , S.A , Madrid , 1960 .
 ESTEBANEZ CALDERON , Serafin Estebanez Calderon : Asamblea general de los caballeros y damas de Triana , y toma de habito en la orden de cierta rubia bailadora in Escenas andaluzas , Madrid , 1847 .
 MARTIN SALAZAR , Jorge : Los cantes flamencos , Diputacion General de Granada , n.d. MAIRENA , Antonio Chacon and Molina , Ricardo : Mundo y formas del cante flamenco , de Occidente , Madrid , 1963 , Libreria Al-Andalus , Granada-Sevilla , 1979 .
 Musicologist Hipolito Rossy , Musicologist Hipolito Rossy : Teoria del cante jondo , Second edition , CREDSA S.A. , Barcelona , 1998 ISBN 84-7056-354-8
The Andalusian Centre of Flamenco is an institution in Jerez de la Frontera , Spain founded in 1993 to safeguard and promote the values and standards of the traditional Andalusian art form known as flamenco .
It is devoted to the investigation , recovery , and collection of flamenco-related historical documents , whether they are in audio , visual , or journalistic form .
It also has a collection of flamenco artifacts , including musical instruments , costumes , promotional posters , sheet music , and postcards .
The Centre operates a museum and library to help educate the public and serve as a resource for scholars
Estrella Morente is a Spanish flamenco singer .
 flamenco singer Enrique Morente was born on August 14 , 1980 in Las Gabias , Granada in southern Spain .
 flamenco singer Enrique Morente is the daughter of flamenco singer Enrique Morente and dancer Aurora Carbonell .
 flamenco singer Enrique Morente has performed with flamenco singer Enrique Morente father since age seven and recorded flamenco singer Enrique Morente first album in 2001 , Mi Cante Y Un Poema .
This was followed the same year by Calle del Aire , which was well received by critics and flamenco fans .
 flamenco singer Enrique Morente released flamenco singer Enrique Morente third album , Mujeres in 2006 , which flamenco singer Enrique Morente father produced .
 On December 14 , 2001 flamenco singer Enrique Morente married bullfighter Javier Conde in Nuestra Senora de las Angustias basilica in Granada in southern Spain .
 This have two children , Curro and Estrella .
 flamenco singer Enrique Morente was the voice behind Penelope Cruz s flamenco song in the 2006 film Volver .
 flamenco singer Enrique Morente played flamenco singer Enrique Morente in the 2011 animated feature Chico & Rita
Ana Belen Lopez Ruiz is a Spanish flamenco and classical dancer .
The prestigious Berklee College of Music called her one of the most passionate and roots-driven rising stars of flamenco dance .
She is the Prima Ballerina of the Arena di Verona and Il Cambroio , and the muse of film director Franco Zeffirelli .
 Ana Belen Lopez Ruiz was born in 1986 in Tarragona .
Her family was from Cordoba and Seville .
 Her family is said to have been born with dancing shoes .
 Her family talent came to the fore right from the age of 5 when Her family gave a performance in Barcelona as a tribute to Carmen Amaya .
 At the age of 9 , Her family represented Spain at the Interfest in Moscow .
 In 1994 , Her family danced at the Teatro de Madrid with Angel Corella , at a show to benefit UNICEF , and acted on Telecinco s The Trampoline .
 In the same year , Her family appeared on the TV contest program , Bravo Bravissimo where Her family earned 2nd place in the classical dance category .
 At the age of 11 , in 1997 , Her family represented Spain at the World Tourism Fair in Saint Petersburg .
 Her family graduated from Conservatorio de Danza de Madrid .
 At the age of 17 Her family established Her family own company which employs around 20 people .
 In 2004 in Cordoba , Her family won the first prize , Mario Maya in the Concurso Nacional de Arte Flamenco .
 Her family fist debut show as a professional was in 2005 when Her family presented Atrapados por el arte in Tarragona and repeated this show on 21-22 January 2006 at the Teatro de Madrid .
 Her family last number at this show was a solo , in which Her family displayed experience , charisma , slyness and boundless virtuosity .
 Her family went on to be the lead dancer in four seasons of the Arena of Verona , appearing in the opera Carmen Amaya and in Franco Zeffirelli 's Il Trovatore , which earned Carmen Amaya the Mario Maya National Flamenco Award .
Lopez directed , wrote and choreographed Cuando Amanece at the Nuevo Apolo Theatre in Madrid in 2008 , and the following year won critical acclaim in A mi manera at the La Latina Theatre .
 In 2012 , Lopez traveled to Prague for her first performance in that city , and also to Brno in the Czech Republic where not only did she dance the flamenco , but she also added a fusion of tango .
 Lopez appeared at the tenth annual Flamenco Festival London in March 2013 , along with Jesus Carmona , Antonio Canales , Sol Pico , and Carlos Rodriguez .
She was featured in Lonely Planet magazine in the July 2013 edition .
 Lopez is scheduled to perform during the 2013-14 season at the University of Florida Performing Arts , where she is described as having `` shotgun fast footwork and attitude to match ''
Abdelhakim Bouromane is a Moroccan-Spaniard singer .
Hakim was born in Casablanca , Morocco on October 9 , 1966 .
 Hakim currently lives in the province of Malaga in the Spanish region of Andalusia .
 Hakim music forms an eclectic mix of Moroccan pop , Flamenco and Arabic musical traditions .
 Hakim also sings and writes Hakim lyrics in both Spanish and Arabic .
 During Hakim musical career , Hakim has recorded eight albums
Javier Limon is a record producer , singer and songwriter born and raised in Madrid , Spain .
 Limon , Son de Limon has worked with several artists , mainly from Madrid , Spain , since Limon , Son de Limon incorporates elements of flamenco rhythm to Limon , Son de Limon work .
 Besides Limon , Son de Limon work as producer has also dabbled as an interpreter and has released three studio albums , Limon , Son de Limon , Son de Limon and Mujeres de Agua .
 Since 2003 , Limon , Son de Limon has done recordings in Palestine , Bogota , Bristol , Paris , Bahia Blanca , Buenos Aires , New York City and Morocco .
 In 2004 , Limon , Son de Limon was awarded the Latin Grammy Award for Producer of the Year for Limon , Son de Limon work on Lagrimas Negras by Diego El Cigala and Bebo Valdes , Cositas Buenas by Paco de Lucia , El Cantante by Andres Calamaro , El Pequeno Reloj by Enrique Morente , Nino Josele by Nino Josele and Tributo Flamenco A Don Juan Valderrama by Various Artists .
Javier Limon serves as the Artistic Director of the Berklee College of Music s Mediterranean Music Institute , which operates in Valencia , Spain as well as Boston , Massachusetts .
 After completing Limon , Son de Limon musical studies in piano and guitar at the Conservatory of Madrid and at New Yorks Saint Francis Prep. , Limon , Son de Limon began Limon , Son de Limon professional career composing flamenco songs for artists such as Enrique Morente , Estrella Morente , Remedios Amaya , Potito and Montse Cortes .
 Following this first stage , Limon , Son de Limon started Limon , Son de Limon career as a record producer with Cositas Buenas by Paco de Lucia , Lagrimas Negras by Bebo Valdes and Diego El Cigala and El Pequeno Reloj by Enrique Morente .
The recording process of Lagrimas Negras , which took three days to record , was filmed by Spanish filmmaker Fernando Trueba .
The album earned the Latin Grammy Award for Best Traditional Tropical Album and received a nomination for Album of the Year .
Lagrimas Negras stayed in the Spanish Album Charts for over 100 weeks .
 In 2009 , Limon , Son de Limon was awarded a Grammy Award for Best Traditional Tropical Album Latin Jazz Album for the album Juntos Para Siempre , another collaboration with Bebo Valdes .
 To produce , Limon , Son de Limon uses editing software such as Pro Tools , Cubase , Logic , mixing material in analog way , not digital , and edit the album in the appropriate format .
 Limon , Son de Limon acknowledges that in order to make music in modern times , people could skip all the costs of intermediaries , but theres nothing like a studio where everyone can play at once , but that costs money to keep .
 The main idea for Limon , Son de Limon production style is not to notice the machines involved while recording , so the final result is as close to the real thing happened at the studio .
 Besides flamenco , there is also other musical interests for Limon , Son de Limon , theres electronic stuff will be interesting to tackle .
Now Im doing some hip hop , which also interests me .
 About Limon , Son de Limon lyrical style , Limon , Son de Limon prefers free metric while writing traditional flamenco music , which is written in tercets , quatrains and cinquains with classic rhymes .
I consider that my lyrics have content .
I sometimes write the lyrics before the music .
And Ive noticed that one of the interesting ways to enrich the flamenco composition is to write poetry that is not in octosyllabic or heroic verse , said Limon to Flamenco World .
 Limon , Son de Limon is a fan of Japanese haiku , since Limon , Son de Limon admitted that the most beautiful flamenco poetry has been written in haikus .
 Limon , Son de Limon started Limon , Son de Limon own record label , Casa Limon , with the help of a sponsor .
 Limon , Son de Limon wanted total creative independence , without pursuing record sales , but to become a well-made product reference .
 The first album released by the label , Limon , Son de Limon , was based on multiculturality and setting down roots .
 The album includes special appareances by Paco de Lucia , Nino Josele , La Tana and Potito , among others , performing original scores by Limon , Son de Limon .
 Limon , Son de Limon asked all the musicians involved on albums by Enrique Morente , Luz Casal , Andres Calamaro and Paco de Lucia , among others , to join the label because they were always the same .
Piranha , Alain Perez and Nino Josele were the first musicians joining the project .
Its like a team that has been widening with other artists such as Eliane Elias , Marc Johnson , the jazz people , Carlinhos Brown ... I am puting a name on something that already exists .
The album received a Latin Grammy Award nomination for Best Flamenco Album .
 Concha Buika recorded Concha Buika first album with Casa Limon and sold 150,000 units in Madrid , Spain .
 In 2010 , Limon , Son de Limon produced and composed Mujeres de Agua , a collaboration album with performances by Mariza , Concha Buika , La Shica , Montse Cortes , Genara , Aynur , Eleftheria , Estrella , Yasmin Levy , Susi , Sandra and Carmen Linares .
 Limon , Son de Limon described the album as a search for songs from the Mediterranean that were undiscovered jewels .
Mujeres de Agua peaked at number 14 in the Spanish album charts
Ojos Negros is the sixth studio album by Spanish duo Azucar Moreno , released on Sony - Epic in 1992 .
The albums title translates as Dark Eyes and is a reference to one of the tracks included , the Chilean folk tune Yo Vendo Unos Ojos Negros .
Ojos Negros , just like preceding album Mambo , was recorded in both London , Madrid and Miami and was a collaboration with acclaimed British producer Nick Patrick .
 acclaimed British producer Nick Patrick started acclaimed British producer Nick Patrick career as a recording engineer for Heaven 17 and B.E.F. in the early 80s and has since gained prominence as a producer and arranger in acclaimed British producer Nick Patrick own right for a large number of artists in genres as diverse as pop and rock , world music and classical .
 Patricks production of Ojos Negros marked a change in musical direction for Azucar Moreno as Patricks production of Ojos Negros mainly featured live orchestrations including percussion , brass , woodwind and sophisticated string arrangements and that Patricks production of Ojos Negros combined both disco , club and flamenco influenced material with midtempo tracks and romantic ballads like Vente Conmigo and En Tu Calle Sin Salida , and the Salazar sisters adapting the Salazar sisters vocal style accordingly , even harmonising on certain titles .
 Despite - or because of - this Ojos Negros proved to be a modest commercial success compared to the preceding Bandido and album Mambo , both in Spain and Latin America .
The album spawned five single releases in 1992 and early 1993 , all minor hits ; a cover of the Venezuelan standard Moliendo Cafe , first made famous by Mario Suarez , Hazme El Amor , co-written by Spanish singer and composer Miguel Gallardo who would go on to write several of the duos hits later in the 90s and 2000s , Veneno , a remixed version of Azucarero and finally Mirame , a duet with Mexican singer Luis Miguel .
Hazme El Amor was in 1997 the only track from Ojos Negros to be included on Azucar Morenos first greatest hits album Mucho Azucar - Grandes Exitos .
 Just like album Mambo the album was released with alternative cover art in Japan
Ketama are a Spanish musical group in the New Flamenco tradition .
Fusing flamenco with other musical forms , they created a style that lies somewhere between flamenco and pop salsa .
Their music drew as much criticism as praise because purists did not like the change from traditional flamenco , but the group won over the young public .
They continued to fuse other music in , and their 2002 album , Dame la Mano , added hip hop and house music .
Ketama was formed in Madrid in the early eighties , taking its name from a well-known valley in Morocco .
The initial line-up featured Jose Soto Sorderita , Juan Carmona and Ray Heredia .
 Each of the three come from great flamenco dynasties : the Heredias of Madrid , the Habichuelas of Granada and the Carmonas of Jerez .
 Ray Heredia left the band shortly afterwards , and was eventually replaced by Antonio Carmona and Jose Miguel Carmona .
The trio briefly became a quartet , but this was only for a short time , as Jose Soto Sorderita would leave Ketama a few records later .
The group played salsero pop .
However they added to their sound , and without ever leaving flamenco behind they incorporated a number of different musical genres into their music , mainly those arising from black roots , such as blues , jazz or the African kora , as well as funk , reggae and Brazilian music .
 Their first work , Ketama , was released in 1985 , although Their first work was recorded two years earlier .
In 1987 , La Pipa de Kif was released .
The solo singing was still Jose Sotos responsibility , but in this record Antonio Carmona started to show the qualities that turned him into the bands undisputed leader .
It is one of the works by Ketama that drew most acknowledgements and served to launch them at an international level .
The record was mentioned in important newspapers like The Times and The International Herald Tribune , and in 1989 it came away with prizes for the best world music albums from prestigious international music magazines like New Musical Express and Folk Roots .
El arte de lo invisible leaves fusion temporarily aside and recovers a more traditional sound .
Thus , Ketama came to make the live record to which it owes the fame that it attained in Spain .
Until then , although it was a successful band with an acknowledged reputation , it had not reached the public at large yet .
 They earned international recognition with They third record , Songhai , a fusion of flamenco with Danny Thompson and Toumani Diabate s African kora , which was praised in reviews in The Times and The International Herald Tribune .
 Nonetheless , They ultimate success was De aki a Ketama , which was recorded live with the participation , among others , of Antonio Flores and Antonio Vega .
It sold over a million copies , it spent a year in the Spanish hit parade , and won the Ondas award for Best Album , Best Spanish Group and the Premio de la Musica in the Best Song category in 1996 with the song No estamos lokos .
 In the same year No estamos lokos contributed to the film Alma Gitana with two songs .
 De aki a Ketama represented a big push in terms of No estamos lokos economy and sales and it showed that the bands three members moved on the stage as comfortably as fish in water .
Numerous artists participated , like El Potito , Chonchi Heredia , Antonio Vega , Antonio Flores and Juanares .
 After De aki a Ketama , the band tried to break away from Numerous artists last record .
It was conscious of the fact that it would be difficult to repeat such a big success but , at the same time , it did not want to be repetitive .
 The end product was Konfusion , which sold 300,000 copies , which achieved some good sales figures as well , without relinquishing Numerous artists quality or the Ketama imprint .
 In 1998 , the band won the Ondas award for the Best Album again , this time with Konfusion , which sold 300,000 copies , which sold 300,000 copies .
 Violins , an electric guitar , bass , piano , trumpet , trombone and sax can Ondas heard playing alongside Ketama - which was still a quartet - in Y es ke me han kambiao los tiempos .
The time has come for the rumba and salsa , both of which are flamencoised in this record .
In these early records , it is already possible to appreciate a review of the legacy of their respective families , although they are still distant from the audacious developments that were to come , not long afterwards .
 In 1988 , Songhai was released on the market , and its name was that of the court of the Mandinga empire .
Here , flamenco was blended with African music , Toumani Diabate s kora to be specific , alongside which African choruses , the guitar playing and voices of Ketama and Danny Thompson s folk-jazz double bass could be heard .
The version of Vente pa Madrid following the rhythm of the kora is indispensable .
Toma Ketama arrived in 1999 , following a compilation record that collected the best themes that they released between 1990 and 1997 .
 Toma Ketama sounds more like a flamenco record than Konfusion , which sold 300,000 copies , although this does not mean that different influences like pop - which in reality had always been present - , blues or Latin rhythms are absent .
In 2002 , Ketama went a step further and was so bold as to blend flamenco with rap , hip-hop and house music in Dame la mano .
This was the last release before their break-up began .
In order not to leave anyone with a bad taste in their mouth , their farewell was accompanied by 20 pa Ketama : twenty songs for their followers .
With a selection of their best songs and few other new releases and surprises , the band put an end to their twenty-year professional and musical career .
In 1995 , the band was responsible for the original soundtrack of the film El efecto mariposa , a Spanish film directed by Fernando Colomo .
Their music was also heard in the film Alma gitana , directed by Chus Gutierrez and whose protagonist was Amara Carmona .
Ketama also contributed to the AIDS benefit compilation album produced by the Red Hot Organization with Dukeles .
Their current members are Antonio Carmona Jose Miguel Carmona , Juan Carmona
Flamenco rumba , also called rumba flamenca , rumba gitana , gypsy rumba , Spanish rumba or , simply , rumba , is a style of flamenco music from Spain .
 It is known as one of the ida y vuelta , music which diverged in the new world , then returned to Spain in a new form .
In Cuba , the music was performed with percussion instruments .
 The dance that Cuba accompanied was improvised with prominent hip and shoulder movements , more overtly sexual than other styles of flamenco dances .
 The dance that it accompanied style derived from the influence of Afro - Cuban Rumba .
 After a style of flamenco music from Spain was brought back from Cuba to Spain in the 19th century it was modified to be played with guitars and hand clapping , some body slaps , castanets , and cajon .
 Modern performers such as Paco de Lucia and Tomatito have incorporated congas and cajon to the percussion section , as well as palmas , but have not prominently featured the claves which were prominent in Cuba .
 In Cuba , the rumba is performed with multiple percussion instruments , playing in duple meter .
 The flamenco version of Cuba uses palmas , guitar , and golpes .
The rhythm is a modified tresillo rhythm with eight beats grouped into a repeating pattern of 3 +3 +2 .
Unlike traditional flamenco , rumba flamencas may be played in any key , major , minor and modal .
The tempo of Rumba Flamenca is slower than other , more traditional flamenco styles such as bulerias and fandango .
There are 4 beats per bar .
Accent the 2nd and 4th beats
Pata Negra is a famous flamenco band in the history of Spanish music .
Established by Raimundo Amador Fernandez and Rafael Amador Fernandez after the band Veneno broke up .
Their style of derivative rhythms based on flamenco music and blues , which they titled bluesleria , made an impact on other modern flamenco music bands .
The Amador brothers as Pata Negra , recorded six records between 1981 and 1995 ,
Greatest Hits is a best of album by the French Rumba Catalana band Gipsy Kings , which was released in 1994 in Europe .
 More than a simple compilation of previous albums , it also includes the 1992 single Pida Me La , a studio release of Galaxia , Allegria and single Pida Me La Dona , a more energetic release of Vamos a Bailar from the LP version and the popular party Medley -LRB- consisting of a mix of Bamboleo , Volare , Djobi Djoba , Pida Me La and Baila Me -RSB- .
The Japanese edition of this album includes an extra track , Este Mundo as track # 18 .
 A similar compilation , The Best of the Gipsy Kings , was released a year later in the U.S. ; it has a different song order and replaces Pida Me La , A Mi Manera , Tu Quieres Volver , Soy , La Quiero and Allegria with Viento Del Arena , Quiero Saber , Montana , Trista Pena , Love & Liberte and the previously unreleased A Tu Vera .
 Also , while single Pida Me La Dona and Galaxia on the Greatest Hits album are the studio versions , the ones on The Best of the Gipsy Kings are live versions .
The song Escucha Me is also slightly different
Carmen Amaya was a flamenco dancer and singer , of Romani origin , born in the Somorrostro slum of Barcelona , Spain , Vila Olimpica nowadays .
 Carmen Amaya first danced in a cave near Granada , Spain .
 Carmen Amaya has been called the greatest Spanish gypsy dancer of Carmen Amaya generation .
and the most extrardinary personality of all time in flamenco dance .
 Carmen Amaya danced from the time Carmen Amaya was five years old .
 Accompanied on the guitar by Carmen Amaya father , Carmen Amaya danced in waterfront bars in Barcelona .
 A young person who saw Carmen Amaya dance as a girl was Sabicas , who later said I saw Carmen Amaya dance and it seemed like something supernatural to I ... I never saw anyone dance like Carmen Amaya .
 I do n't know how Carmen Amaya did it , I just do n't know !

Sabicas became a great flamenco guitarist and accompanied her for many years .
He recorded Queen of the Gypsies and Flamenco !
 with Carmen Amaya .
 In 1929 , Carmen Amaya made Carmen Amaya debut in Paris with noted Spanish dancer Raquel Miller , to warm acclaims and admiration of Carmen Amaya dancing skill .
 Carmen Amaya then performed at Folies Bergere .
 Carmen Amaya declined an offer from Buenos Aires until Carmen Amaya was called to appear in Madrid .
 After this acclaimed performance , Carmen Amaya accepted the Buenos Aires offer , in spite of protestations from Uncle Sebastian , one of the sixteen members of Carmen Amaya entourage .
 Argentine audiences were so impressed that Argentine audiences named a theatre after Carmen Amaya .
 Carmen Amaya then toured South America , and in Mexico City Carmen Amaya was signed by S. Hurok , who brought Carmen Amaya to New York .
 Carmen Amaya moved to South America in 1936 , where Carmen Amaya went on to act in several films that broke box office records , including the Romeo and Juliet adaptation Los Tarantos , and the short film Danzas Gitanas .
 Carmen Amaya was invited by Franklin Roosevelt to dance in the White House in 1944 , and also by Harry S. Truman in 1953
Donn E. Pohren was an American guitarist and historian .
 Donn E. Pohren is known for Donn E. Pohren three major texts on flamenco : The Art of flamenco , Lives and Legends of Flamenco : a biographical history , and A Way of Life .
 Donn E. Pohren is the only non-Spaniard to receive the title of flamencologist by the Catedra de Flamencologia .
 Hailing from Minneapolis , Donn E. Pohren moved to Seville , married the dancer Luisa Maravilla , had a daughter , and completed a university degree in Madrid .
 Donn E. Pohren states that in the beginning I used to say I mother was Spanish , and call I Daniel Maravilla , which did help in getting accepted
Mucho Azucar - Grandes Exitos is a greatest hits album by Spanish duo Azucar Moreno , released on Sony International in 1997 .
Following the success of 1996 album Esclava De Tu Piel and its string of hit singles Azucar Moreno released their first career retrospective , Mucho Azucar - Grandes Exitos , .
 The compilation covers their hits from 1988 through to 1997 , thus excluding material from their first two albums recorded for EMI Music , starting with their Spanish breakthrough single Debajo Del Olivo , the version used is however not the remixed house music hit version , subtitled Mix in Spain , later included on the remix albums the Hard Core Flamenco Mix In Spain and The Sugar Mix Album but the original album version from 1988s Carne De Melocoton .
Mucho Azucar continues with four titles from their international breakthrough album Bandido including the title track Bandido with which they represented Spain in the Eurovision Song Contest 1990 in Zagreb , Yugoslavia and finished fifth , the follow-up Ven Devorame Otra Vez , Oye Como Va/Guajira and A Caballo .
 The 1991 album Mambo is represented by just two of the five singles released ; the title track Mambo and Tu Quieres Mas - lead single Torero !
is consequently omitted .
Hazme El Amor is the only track from 1992s Ojos Negros , while the compilation features two tracks from 1994s El Amor ; the title track El Amor which also appeared in the Hollywood movie The Specialist and No Sera Facil and finally three tracks from the duos at the time most recent album Esclava De Tu Piel , Solo Se Vive Una Vez , Hoy Tengo Ganas De Ti and the title track Esclava De Tu Piel .
 Mucho Azucar also features one new recording , Muevete Salvaje , originally recorded the previous year by fellow Sony International in 1997 act Cherokee .
Just like Esclava De Tu Piel , Muevete Salvaje was produced by Ricardo Eddy Martinez and turned into another big hit single for the Salazar sisters .
The single was released as two different editions , one as a double A-side with 1990s Bandido .
The second single was entitled Mucho Azucar Remixes - Muevete Salvaje Y Otros Remixes and was an eight track E.P. , including four versions of Muevete Salvaje , the Radio Edit , the Hard Funk Mix , the Hard Core Flamenco Mix and the original Mucho Azucar album version , plus Oye Como Va/Guajiro and Debajo Del Olivo - both remixes from The Sugar Mix Album , as well as Hava Naguila and Solo Se Vive Una Vez .
 While Sony Music have continued to release hits compilations with Azucar Moreno all through the 2000s , such as Toda La Pasion De Azucar Moreno , Coleccion De Oro , 20 Grandes Exitos , Los Esenciales and 20 Exitos Originales as well as numerous mid-price collections , none of these include any new recordings or tracks not to be found on their three subsequent studio albums for the Sony International in 1997 label , several of the duos greatest hits do however appear in edited form .
 Mucho Azucar - Grandes Exitos was in 1999 re-released with slightly revised cover art but with the same track list under the title 20th Anniversary as the Sony Latin label , originally CBS-Epic Latin , celebrated Mucho Azucar 20th anniversary
Nina Pastori is a Spanish flamenco singer .
 Nina Pastori was born Maria Rosa Garcia Garcia in San Fernando on 15 January 1978 .
The youngest of five siblings and only daughter of a military man and Romani flamenco singer La Pastori , she started her artistic career at a young age .
At the age of six she accompanied her mother in the flamenco tablaos of Barrio de la Pastora , and a year later won a contest in San Fernando .
 Her initial name was La nina de la Pastori , but she later changed Her initial name to Nina Pastori .
Among her first mentors was Camaron de la Isla , also from San Fernando , whose purist flamenco style she followed in her early years .
Later she added a more commercial , pop tone to her image and style without losing her flamenco roots , and artists Paco Ortega and Alejandro Sanz helped her produce her first album , Entre dos puertos , when she was seventeen .
The single Tu me camelas was a hit in Spain in summer 1996 .
Her second album , Eres luz confirmed her success , with songs again by Paco Ortega and Alejandro Sanz , Parrita , Manuel Malou and her brother Paco .
In 2000 , she published her third album , Canailla , produced by Alejandro Sanz and Josemi Carmona of the flamenco group Ketama ; it is dedicated to her home town and more flamenco than the previous works .
Her album Maria evolved to a more personal style , taking part in the lyrics and composition of some of her songs , a trend that she continued in No hay quinto malo , her fifth album .
In Joyas prestadas , where Nina Pastori makes personal versions of songs originally by artists from very different styles and genres .
The original artists include Joan Manuel Serrat , Alejandro Sanz , Mexican rockers Mana , Dominican artist Juan Luis Guerra , Antonio Machin , Manolo Garcia of El Ultimo de la Fila , Luz Casal , Armando Manzanero , Los Jeros or Marife de Triana .
 Juan Luis Guerra sang a version of Schubert s Ave Maria during Pope John Paul II s last visit to Madrid on May 2003 .
 Later this version was included in a new edition of Juan Luis Guerra album Maria released in 2006 .
 Juan Luis Guerra is married to Julio Jimenez Borja Chaboli , co-producer , composer and percussionist in Juan Luis Guerra albums .
 Juan Luis Guerra is the great-granddaughter of flamenco singer Ines la del Pelao
Manuel Soto Loreto , known as Manuel Torre or Manuel Torres , was a Romani flamenco singer .
 Manuel Torre was born in Jerez de la Frontera , Spain , in the neighbourhood of San Miguel , which together with the neighbourhood of Santiago , is a traditional centre of flamenco in Jerez .
 One of the most representative singers of Jerez , Manuel Torre was influenced by singers Manuel Molina , El Marrurro and Enrique el Mellizo .
 Manuel Torre developed Manuel Torre career in the cafes cantante of Seville .
 In Manuel Torre turn , Manuel Torre was one of the main influences in the work of singers like La Nina de los Peines , Antonio Mairena or Manuel Agujetas .
 Manuel Torre was an honored guest , singing the siguiriyas , at the Concurso de Cante Jondo held at the Alhambra in Granada .
This 1922 music festival was organized by Manuel de Falla to celebrate the flamenco arts .
 An encyclopedic singer , An encyclopedic singer excelled in siguiriyas , solea , saetas , and fandangos .
 However , An encyclopedic singer rarely entered the recording studio , and An encyclopedic singer recordings are of irregular quality : .
 The flamenco fans who have only listened to An encyclopedic singer in recordings only know An encyclopedic singer shadow , because An encyclopedic singer made all those recordings in a state of unconsciousness .
Historic Recordings / Grabaciones historicas 1909-1931 , Empresa Publica de Gestion , 1997 .
ALVAREZ CABALLERO , Angel : La discoteca ideal del flamenco , Editorial Planeta , Barcelona , 1995 ISBN 84-08-01602-4 .
 Confesiones de Antonio Mairena , Antonio : Confesiones de Antonio Mairena , Secretariado de Publicaciones de la Universidad de Sevilla , Seville , 1976 ISBN 84-7405-031-6
Miguel Angel Poveda Leon is a Spanish flamenco singer .
 Miguel Angel Poveda Leon father is from Lorca in Murcia and His father mother from Puertollano .
 Miguel Angel Poveda Leon is a flamenco singer and interpreter of other genres .
 Miguel Angel Poveda Leon has collaborated with artists from various disciplines who were previously unknown to flamenco audiences .
 In 2003 , Miguel Angel Poveda Leon moved to Seville .
 Miguel Angel Poveda Leon often collaborates with the Spanish flamenco guitarist , Juan Gomez Chicuelo with whom Miguel Angel Poveda Leon has toured extensively in Europe , Japan and the US
Pepe de Lucia is a Spanish flamenco singer and songwriter .
The son of flamenco guitarist Antonio Sanchez and brother of flamenco guitarists Paco de Lucia and Ramon de Algeciras , he adopted the stage name Pepe de Lucia in honor of his Portuguese mother , Luzia Gomes .
He is the father of Spanish pop singer Malu .
 De Lucia released flamenco guitarists Paco de Lucia debut recording , Los Chiquitos de Algeciras , with flamenco guitarists Paco de Lucia brother Paco de Lucia in 1961 .
 flamenco guitarists Paco de Lucia continued to sing on flamenco guitarists Paco de Lucia brothers albums until 1988 , when flamenco guitarists Paco de Lucia was replaced by Duquende
A tablao is a place where flamenco shows are performed .
Developed during the sixties of the 20th century throughout Spain replacing the cafes cantantes .
The cafes cantantes were entertainment establishments where , in addition to serving drinks , offered performances of singing , playing and dancing flamenco .
These cafes had its peak from mid-19th century and well into the second decade of the 20th century .
The cafes cantantes used to have all the same decorative style : walls decorated with bullfighting posters and mirrors in a large room with tables , and at the back which was the tablao where artists offer their shows
Manuel de los Santos Pastor , also known as El Agujetas or el El Agujeta , is a Flamenco singer .
 Son of singer singers Dolores Agujetas el Viejo .
Both father and son follow the school of Manuel Torre , representative of the tradition of Jerez , and father of singers Dolores Agujetas and Antonio Agujetas .
 Manuel Torre worked in Manuel Torre fathers forge until Manuel Torre went to work in Madrid as a teenager .
 Manuel Torre took part in the recording of the Magna Antologia del Cante , compiled by Blas Vega .
 Manuel Torre appeared singing a martinete in Carlos Sauras film Flamenco and in Dominique Abels documentary Agujetas.Cantaor
Javier Ruibal is a Spanish musician and songwriter .
Javier Ruibal was born in El Puerto de Santa Maria , province of Cadiz in southern Spain .
 Javier Ruibal first album , called Duna , was released in 1983 .
 Javier Ruibal is highly considered for Javier Ruibal vocal talents and for blending different music styles such as flamenco , jazz and Maghreb music and developing a personal brand .
 Javier Ruibal plays the guitar and is usually accompanied by another guitar player , first Antonio Toledo and since around 2000 Tito Alcedo , and occasionally by more musicians like John Parsons , Jorge Pardo or Chano Dominguez .
 Javier Ruibal has frequently played outside Spain ; including Algeria , England , West Bank and New York .
 Javier Ruibal has composed music for several other Spanish artists and famous singers such as Ana Belen or David Broza have sung David Broza compositions .
 Javier Ruibal also appeared on stage together with artists as Pablo Milanes , Joaquin Sabina or Carlos Cano .
 In 2007 , Javier Ruibal was awarded the Medal of Andalusia by the autonomous government of Andalusia .
 In 2009 , Javier Ruibal was chosen to give the opening address of the Cadix Carnaval celebration
 Miguel de la Bastide is a Trinidad - born Flamenco composer and virtuoso guitarist who first appeared on the scene in 1996 on the CD compilation under the record label Narada Productions that placed Miguel de la Bastide alongside some of Spains most prominent guitarists , including Paco de Lucia , Tomatito and Rafael Riqueni to name a few .
Since then , he has appeared on numerous other Flamenco and Nuevo Flamenco compilations .
He is the only guitarist from Trinidad and Tobago that has had success recording in the flamenco genre and is also a recipient of the Chalmers Award and Toronto Arts Council Award .
Miguel de la Bastide was born in San Fernando , Trinidad and Tobago in 1962 .
 Miguel de la Bastide is an alumnus of Naparima College and began playing guitar in Miguel de la Bastide mid-teens .
 In 1981 , Miguel de la Bastide immigrated to Toronto , Canada at the age of 18 .
 In Toronto , Canada , Miguel de la Bastide studied with Allan Torok , David Phillips , Guillermo Rios and Jose Valle Fajardo Chuscales .
 In Spain at Amor de Dios - Centro de Flamenco y Danza Espanola , Miguel de la Bastide studied with Lorenzo Uirseda Barca , Leo Avellaneda Molina , La Tati , Ciro , Cristobal Reyes , Paco Romero , Javier Cruz and Domingo Ortega .
 In 1992 , Miguel de la Bastide became the music director for Compania Carmen Romero where Miguel de la Bastide wrote original scores for their various music and dance productions that were performed in Toronto , Canada , US , France , Spain and Singapore .
In 1998 , the music of the companys second production Flamenco de Ayer y Hoy was to become Miguels first solo album El Cambio .
A video for El Cambio , directed by Dan Eisen was released through Bravo !
in 2000 .
 Also in 2000 , under the direction of Philip Stanger of Stanger Productions , Philip Stanger of Stanger Productions recorded all the flamenco guitar segments in the world-released television series Queen of Swords .
 In 2003 , Philip Stanger of Stanger Productions had the pleasure of being double billed with Martin Taylor in Singapore at the Esplanade - Theatres on the Bay .
 Later in 2003 , Philip Stanger of Stanger Productions second solo album Siento was released and in 2005 , four tracks were selected by Somerset Entertainment for a three CD compilation Mistica - The Passion of the Spanish Guitar .
 Six other tracks from Philip Stanger of Stanger Productions album El Cambio was also selected and placed on the same compilation album .
 In 2007 , Philip Stanger of Stanger Productions toured through North America with the International Guitar Night ensemble where Philip Stanger of Stanger Productions recorded the International Guitar Night II live album with Brian Gore , DGary and Clive Carroll under the Pacific Music label .
 In 2008 , Philip Stanger of Stanger Productions toured through the United Kingdom with the International Guitar Night ensemble with Brian Gore , Andy Sheppard and Cecilia Zabala .
 In 2008 , Philip Stanger of Stanger Productions recorded and co-arranged the cut Spanish Love Affair from Terrence Howard s album Shine Through Spanish Love Affair from Terrence Howard .
 Miguel de la Bastide served on staff at The Royal Conservatory of Music in Toronto , Canada between 2003 to 2005 and Miguel de la Bastide had Miguel de la Bastide first published interview on 20th Century Guitar Magazine in the February 2004 issue entitled Fire and Grace - The Gypsy Soul of Flamenco Guitarist Miguel de la Bastide .
 Miguel de la Bastide was featured in the Max Montalvos documentary film El Payo , that premiered in Toronto on 28 May 2010 .
The documentary outlines the life of the late David Phillips , one of Miguels prominent teachers .
 On 23 April 2010 , the late David Phillips performed the late David Phillips music for the first time with the International Symphony Orchestra as guest artist for their end of season Danza Finale , with Jerome David Summers as conductor and music director .
 On 21 June 2011 , Miguel de la Bastide contributed to the soundtrack CD for the documentary film El Payo .
 Miguel de la Bastide piece is entitled Los Suenos Si Se Hacen Realidad .
 Since 1992 , Miguel de la Bastide has performed extensively in North America , Europe and Asia .
 Currently resides in Toronto where Miguel de la Bastide runs a flamenco guitar school
Sara Pereyra Baras is a female flamenco dancer , born in San Fernando , Cadiz , Spain .
She is internationally famous and regularly tours the world .
 She was taught to dance by She mother , Concha Baras , who ran a dance school in Cadiz , Spain .
 She was gaining a reputation when She joined guitarist Manuel Moraos company in 1989 .
 She has won a number of awards including the Madrono Flamenco of Montellano in 1993 , and in 1999 and 2001 , She received a prize for the Best Female Spanish Dance Performer .
 She collaborated with Javier Baron , and Merche Esmeralda included Merche Esmeralda in Merche Esmeralda show Mujeres .
 She worked with Antonio Canales on Gitano , and with El Guito at the Theatre du Chatelet in Paris .
 She danced with Manuel Morao at the Seville Expo in 1992 and later in New York .
As a solo dancer , she took part in several tributes to Camaron de la Isla .
In 1997 , she started her own company , with which she closed the Festival Nacional de Cante de las Minas .
The companys first shows included Sensaciones and Suenos .
Sara Baras appeared in other shows including Juana la Loca and Mariana Pineda .
 Mariana Pineda has increasingly worked across all forms of media including television , film and the fashion catwalks .
 In 1998 Mariana Pineda presented the programme Algo Mas Que Flamenco on TVE .
 In July 1999 , on the Patio of the Casa Pilatos in the Seville Expo , Mariana Pineda was filmed for .
 As a model , Mariana Pineda has appeared in the shows of Amaya Arzuaga at Fashion Week in London and for Francis Montesinos Madrid and Lisbon .
 Mariana Pineda also promoted an underwear collection by Triumph with other members of Mariana Pineda dance company , and Mariana Pineda was featured in a catalogue for Cartier
 Sabicas , the Flamenco player was a Flamenco guitarist , of Romani origin , who was born on 16 March 1912 in Pamplona , his native Spain and died in 14 April 1990 in New York .
 Sabicas , the Flamenco player began playing guitar at the age of 4 and made Sabicas , the Flamenco player performing debut 2 years later .
 Sabicas , the Flamenco player early style was influenced by Ramon Montoya , with whom Sabicas , the Flamenco player was related on Sabicas , the Flamenco player mothers side of the family .
 Extensive collaboration with important cantaores of the period helped Sabicas , the Flamenco player develop Sabicas , the Flamenco player unique personal style .
 Leaving Spain in 1936 during the Spanish Civil War , Sabicas , the Flamenco player went into exile in South America with bailaora Carmen Amaya .
 Sabicas , the Flamenco player lived in Mexico City , married Esperanza Gonzalez Erazo , had four children : Maricruz Castellon Gonzales , 1944 , Carlos Castellon Gonzales , 1946 , Agustine Castellon Gonzales , 1952 and Margaret Castellon Gonzales , 1956 .
 Margaret Castellon Gonzales and Margaret Castellon Gonzales live in New York City , Maricruz Castellon Gonzales lives in Alaska , and Margaret Castellon Gonzales is deceased .
Carmen & Sabicas toured together several times .
 Sabicas , the Flamenco player later settled in New York City in the United States .
 Sabicas , the Flamenco player did not return to Sabicas , the Flamenco player native Spain until 1967 .
 Sabicas , the Flamenco player was instrumental in the introduction of Flamenco to audiences outside of his native Spain and the Spanish-speaking world .
 Sabicas , the Flamenco player was probably best known for Sabicas , the Flamenco player technical skills : blazingly fast picados , fast arpeggios , quality composition for the many forms of flamenco , and infallible rhythm , which was critical if playing with a dancer .
 Also , Sabicas , the Flamenco player was considered to have perfect pitch .
 The finest technique around has got to be Sabicas , the Flamenco player , the Flamenco player , famed guitarist Chet Atkins told Guitar Player Magazine in March 1972 .
 Sabicas , the Flamenco player was a standout of Sabicas , the Flamenco player day , not only with technique , but with major contributions , playing Flamenco previously unimaginable and giving new tools and possibilities for the solo instrument .
 Sabicas , the Flamenco player brought this art to concert halls and major theaters where all classes can enjoy .
 Notable contemporary players such as Paco de Lucia , Tomatito , Serranito , Juan Manuel Canizares , El Viejin , Vicente Amigo , Gerardo Nunez and many more claim large influence from Sabicas , the Flamenco player music
Grigory Grisha Goryachev is a Russian virtuoso flamenco and classical guitarist now living in the United States .
A master of both flamenco and classical guitar , he is one of the worlds few guitarists to continue the traditions of solo flamenco in concert performances .
 He is heavily influenced by Paco de Lucia and Homenaje a Sabicas .
 Grigory Grisha Goryachev is technically a highly proficient player , testament to Grigory Grisha Goryachev background in classical guitar from a very young age .
 A native of St. Petersburg , Grigory Grisha Goryachev began to play the guitar at the age of six , taught by Dmitry father Dmitry , a master teacher and player of the classical guitar and learned quickly .
He was a child prodigy , performing regularly in the top concert halls of St. Petersburg , Moscow , Minsk , Riga and other cities in the Soviet Union from the age of nine , receiving wide coverage in Soviet magazines and newspapers .
 His father was able to obtain copies of flamenco recordings of flamenco greats such as Juan Martin and Homenaje a Sabicas , attracting Juan Martin interest from an early age .
 But access was limited ; Grigory Grisha Goryachev has said , I had very bad access to recordings .
 Most of what I used to pick up were pirates .
 Grigory Grisha Goryachev has said of Grigory Grisha Goryachev allurement to flamenco , It was everything : the sound of the guitar , the rhythms .
Its hard not to be moved by this music .
 Its hard moves I so much that I want to cry .
 Grigory Grisha Goryachev performed as a child on Soviet radio and television and participated in the TV marathon , Revival of St. Petersburg , broadcast across the world .
 In 1986 Grigory Grisha Goryachev saw Paco de Lucia at a concert in Russia at the peak of Grigory Grisha Goryachev career which Grigory Grisha Goryachev says blew his mind and was absolutely amazing ; it was a massive influence on Grigory Grisha Goryachev and a turning point in Grigory Grisha Goryachev life .
 From this point Grigory Grisha Goryachev concentrated on learning flamenco , helped by Grigory Grisha Goryachev father , transcribing many unpublished pieces completely by ear as Grigory Grisha Goryachev listened to recordings .
 Grigory Grisha Goryachev learned to play flamenco purely by listening to recordings of the masters , professing never to have learned from tablature in Grigory Grisha Goryachev life .
 Grigory Grisha Goryachev tremolo picking was initially poor , but on the advice of Grigory Grisha Goryachev father His father practiced it slowly for two years , after which His father was able to play proficiently .
 Grigory Grisha Goryachev was driven to play like Grigory Grisha Goryachev newfound hero , and would play along with the recordings , attempting to match the pace of de Lucias picados .
 Grigory Grisha Goryachev initial study into flamenco covered the works of Juan Martin , and Grigory Grisha Goryachev performed these in concert while still a boy .
 In 1991 , Grigory Grisha Goryachev performed at UN headquarters in New York City and also toured Scandinavia where Grigory Grisha Goryachev performed for royalty .
 In 1993 , Grigory Grisha Goryachev represented Grigory Grisha Goryachev native city in the Days of St. Petersburg at the Jerusalem Festival , and in 1994 Grigory Grisha Goryachev performed at an Andres Segovia memorial concert at the Festival International de Colmar in Colmar , France .
 In 1997 Grigory Grisha Goryachev toured Spain and met and performed with Grigory Grisha Goryachev hero , flamenco master Paco de Lucia who aided Grigory Grisha Goryachev in applying for a visa to go to the United States .
 Grigory Grisha Goryachev said , I met Paco when I was touring Spain and I played for Grigory Grisha Goryachev at Grigory Grisha Goryachev home .
 Grigory Grisha Goryachev said that I sounded very good , but if I wanted to play flamenco I had to move to Spain .
 I never managed to do I .
 Grigory Grisha Goryachev repertoire now also includes the music of other Flamenco masters such as Vicente Amigo , Manolo Sanlucar and Rafael Riqueni .
 In May 2005 Grigory Grisha Goryachev was awarded a special prize for the Best Performance of Spanish Music at the VI International Classical Guitar Competition in Almeria , Spain , later performing at the Festival de Musica Espanola de Cadiz and the Festival de Musica de Jimena de la Frontera .
 Grigory Grisha Goryachev is a graduate of the New England Conservatory of Music in Boston , where Grigory Grisha Goryachev studied under Eliot Fisk .
 Both Eliot Fisk and Christopher Parkening have praised Goryachevs abilities .
 Grigory Grisha Goryachev has recorded two albums of flamenco music : Alma Flamenca and Homenaje a Sabicas .
 Today , Grigory Grisha Goryachev is one of the worlds few guitarists to continue the traditions of solo flamenco in concert performances .
 Grigory Grisha Goryachev has professed Grigory Grisha Goryachev desire to see more guitarists follow Grigory Grisha Goryachev example in playing traditional flamenco to keep the music alive and to encourage classical players to play flamenco compositions in their repertoire and accept it .
 However , the Boston Globe says that Grigory Grisha Goryachev repertoire ranges from traditional flamenco to jazzier works by contemporary composers .
 In May 2012 Grigory Grisha Goryachev performed Rodrigo s popular Concierto de Arajuez at the Melrose Memorial Hall in Boston .
 In October 2012 Grigory Grisha Goryachev performed with Peruvian guitarist Jorge Caballero at the 2012 Texas AandM International Guitar Symposium and Competition at Rudder Theatre
Juan dAnyelica is a Jazz Flamenco guitarist from Spain who plays extensively throughout Mexico .
 Recently , Juan dAnyelica appeared on Paco de Lucia s album Cositas Buenas .
 Furthermore , Juan dAnyelica has appeared at the Cancun Jazz Festival .
 The one album featuring Anyelica is Juan dAnyelica DAnyelica Flamenco Fussion - Live ... One Night At Roots .
A second is called Salud .
Juans Flamenco Fusion band videos , CDs and photos can be seen on their web site FlamencoFusion.com
Dr. Juan Serrano is a flamenco guitarist who has played concerts and made recordings throughout the world .
 Dr. Juan Serrano has devoted much of Dr. Juan Serrano life to giving concerts and teaching flamenco guitar in the United States .
 Dr. Juan Serrano was born in Cordoba , Spain in 1935 .
 At the age of 9 , Dr. Juan Serrano studied guitar with Dr. Juan Serrano father , Antonio del Lunar , a professional guitarist .
 Dr. Juan Serrano made Dr. Juan Serrano professional debut at age 13 , and soon earned a reputation throughout Cordoba , Spain in 1935 and Europe as a gifted musician .
 Dr. Juan Serrano performed and recorded with flamenco musical , dance , and theatrical companies .
 At this time Dr. Juan Serrano also started Dr. Juan Serrano solo career .
 Dr. Juan Serrano home town of Cordoba was so proud of Dr. Juan Serrano accomplishments that they replaced the bell in the town clock with recordings of Dr. Juan Serrano guitar playing .
 In 1961 Dr. Juan Serrano accepted an invitation to come to America and perform on The Ed Sullivan Show .
 The success of this performance led to numerous solo flamenco guitar concerts and more TV appearances , then a recording contract with Elektra Records , who released Dr. Juan Serrano the US debut album Ole , la mano !
in 1962 .
 The New York Times said Dr. Juan Serrano had ten dexterous fingers that often sound like twenty ... a breathtaking technician who can wring rhythmic dance fury out of fandangos and zapateados .
 Dr. Juan Serrano is a lyric sentamentalist , who can make the strings cry .
 Dr. Juan Serrano made the US Dr. Juan Serrano home , where Dr. Juan Serrano achieved renown as an instructor .
 In Feb. 1968 Dr. Juan Serrano was the featured cover-photo artist for Guitar Player magazine .
 Along with others such as Sabicas and Mario Escudero , Serranos virtuosity helped establish solo flamenco guitar as a viable concert instrument beyond the borders of Cordoba , Spain in 1935 .
 Sabicas developed the guitar program at California State University , Fresno and headed the guitar department until Sabicas retirement .
 In addition to Sabicas teaching duties , Dr. Juan Serrano is much sought after as a performer , for master classes and as a guest lecturer on the history of Flamenco .
 Dr. Juan Serrano is the only flamenco guitarist in the world with a doctorate in humane letters and a tenured faculty position at a major university .
 Cordoba also awarded Dr. Juan Serrano the Potro de Oro .
 This prestigious honor is awarded once every ten years ; Dr. Juan Serrano and Paco Pena are the only guitarists ever to be so honored .
 Dr. Juan Serrano received the Page One Ball from the Newspaper Guild of New York for Dr. Juan Serrano outstanding performances .
 Dr. Juan Serrano was also awarded the Medalla de Oro from the Spanish Academy of Fine Arts , the Catedra de Flamencologia from Jerez , Cordoba , Spain in 1935 , and an Honorary Doctor of Humane Letters from Fairfield University in Fairfield , Connecticut .
 The city of Fresno has bestowed on Serrano the Fabulous Fresnan and Horizon awards .
Authored several guitar instruction books for Mel Bay Publications , including : .
 Awarded the Medalla de Oro from the Spanish Academy of Fine Arts , the Catedra de Flamencologia from Jerez de la Frontera , Cordoba , Spain in 1935
Ojos de Brujo is a nine-piece band from Barcelona , Spain , who describe their style as jipjop flamenkillo .
The band sold over 100,000 copies of their self-produced Bari album , and has received several awards , among these the BBC Radio 3 World Music Award for Europe in 2004 .
Their success is also notable for being achieved without the aid of label backing ; they set up their own label , La Fabrica de Colores , to get complete artistic freedom for Bari , away from the pressure they perceived from their record company Edel Records for their debut Vengue .
 example Flamenco is clearly central to their sound ; Ramon Gimenez observed the magic lies in the flamenco ... example Flamenco is the heartbeat of Ojos de Brujos songs .
However , they are definitely not pure flamenco .
Xavi Turull said : ... we dont pretend to do flamenco .
What we are doing is using the richness of flamenco and the richness of other music to build up something different .
Maybe sometimes I would say that flamenco is the strongest ingredient , but we dont pretend to be doing flamenco .
 Upon the release of their first album , Vengue , the flamenco fusion group did receive a lot of skepticism and criticism from the flamenco purists .
Many of them refused to acknowledge that the music was true flamenco and that it strayed from its foundation , style and structure .
 However , according to the group , Many of them music reflects the past of flamenco and its multicultural roots .
 The gypsies The gypsies are diverse and multicultural , a people from the Indian subcontinent , the Middle East , Eastern Europe in 2004 and Iberia .
Ojos de Brujos takes this same theme and blends flamenco music with the diverse musical genres of today like hip hop and pop to modernize flamenco .
 For example Flamenco is combined in The gypsies music with other influences including Afro-Cuban , the rap and scratching / turntablism of Hip Hop , and Indian music .
 The music of Ojos de Ojos de Brujo uses the drama of flamenco , but carries The music of Ojos de Brujo along on a steady rhythmic foundation , making the groups music a closer relative to rumba catalana .
Usually the focus of Ojos songs are the vocals by Marina La Canillas Abad , which move smoothly from gritty flamenco wail to authoritative rapping .
 The blend of music opens up The gypsies audience base and provides more opportunity to keep creating new types of sounds .
 Ojos de Brujo also appeals to the youth by addressing social issues and concerns within The gypsies music .
The group name , Eyes of the Sorcerer reflects this theme .
According to group members , the eyes of the sorcerer look deeper into the issues and reveal the truth .
Many people think that the band is named Eyes of the Witch .
 However , Ojos de Brujo is masculine ; Bruja is the Spanish for witch .
 Moreover , none of Many people songs address politics ; instead many reveal current social situations in Spain .
 One of their songs , `` Nada en la nevera '' , `` Nothing in the Fridge , '' Ojos de Brujos highlights poverty , not only in Spain but throughout the world by singing about someone who wakes up every morning to find nothing in the refrigerator .
Criticizing society , in the song `` Naita '' the singer says , `` La sangre se me rebela cuando me pongo a pensar que aqui unos tienen de to y que otros no tienen de na '' or `` My blood boils when I think that there are some who have everything and others who have nothing '' .
Mixing `` dub , hip hop , and flamenco , just to name a few , allows Ojos de Brujo a wide range of expression .
 By blending flamenco and rumba , grabbing handfuls of hip hop , dub and modern-sounding drum licks and bass lines the group makes forward-looking music that could definitely have been made only in Spain and probably only in Barcelona . ''
Creating variety in beats , lyrics , and instruments only enhances their social and cultural message and reflects the modern and highly globalized society in which they perform .
Their CDs have also featured guest appearances by a large number of other musicians , including Nitin Sawhney and Prithpal Rajput from Asian Dub Foundation as well as many Spanish artists
 The traje de flamenca is the costume worn by female flamenco dancers during The traje de flamenca is the costume performances .
The traje de flamenca is the most characteristic visual element of flamenco .
It is a long dress that reaches to the ankle , and which is adorned with ruffles in both the skirt and sleeves .
It is typically brightly colored and may be either plain or patterned , with the most typical being the polka dotted traje de lunares .
Traditionally , the outfit is worn with hair up in a bun and is accompanied by a mantle worn over the shoulders .
The dress can also be made in two parts , with a separate top and skirt .
 The outfit was originally worn by Spanish Gypsies , but is now generally thought of as typically Andalusian and is particularly associated with Andalusian festivals such as the Seville Fair .
The outfit originated in the late 19th and early 20th centuries when women vendors dressed in modest calico gowns adorned with ruffles came to the fairs along with livestock traders .
In time , women of the propertied classes copied these outfits worn originally be rural workers .
Ever since the Seville Fair of 1929 , the traje de flamenca has had a status as the official outfit of the event .
The traje de flamenca has undergone changes over the century or more that it has been in widespread use .
For example , in the 1960s and 70s , the skirts got shorter , with skirts reaching only to the middle of the calf or even to the knee .
Beginning in the 1970s , the hemlines dropped back to the ankle .
In the early 21st century there are a wide variety of designs of traje de flamenca for women and girls .
They come in a variety of colors , plain or patterned , with short or long sleeves , and more or fewer ruffles .
This folkloric outfit has inspired numerous Spanish and international fashion designers , among them Victorio & Lucchino , who have their own line of trajes de flamenca .
Others who have been influenced include Yves Saint Laurent , John Galliano , Valentino Garavani , and Tom Ford .
 New designs in trajes de flamenca are shown annually at the Salon Internacional de la Moda Flamenca , which celebrated New 15th year in 2009 .
The event takes place at the start of the year in Seville .
In 2009 , 32 designers showed 1,200 different outfits ; there were also fashion accessories from 90 firms
Juan Ignacio Gomez Gorjon , better known as Juan Gomez Chicuelo , is a Catalan flamenco guitarist , composer and director .
 Although Juan Ignacio Gomez Gorjon worked with a wide range of artists , Juan Gomez Chicuelo is usually accompanied by the singer Miguel Poveda and singer Duquende , with whom Juan Ignacio Gomez Gorjon has toured extensively in Europe , Japan and the US and made many recordings with .
 Juan Ignacio Gomez Gorjon has also been musical director of Compagnie de Danse Japonaise Shohi Kojima since 1992 , and musical director of the Somorrostro Dansa Flamenca with choreographer Javier Latorre since 2003 .
 Juan Gomez Chicuelo was born in Barcelona , Spain .
 Juan Gomez Chicuelo grew up in a home with brothers who sang and played guitar ; Manel brother Manel , is a percussionist .
 Juan Gomez Chicuelo was a student of Manolo Sanlucar , and Juan Gomez Chicuelo brother , Isidro .
 In Juan Gomez Chicuelo early career , Juan Gomez Chicuelo worked at the Tablao de Carmen with Mario Escudero , Angelita Vargas , Miguel de la Tolea , Eva Yerbabuena , Sara Baras , Adrian Galia , Belen Maya , Antonio ` El Pipa ' and Joaquin Grilo .
 Juan Gomez Chicuelo has accompanied singers such as Enrique Morente , Rancapino , Chano Lobato , Jose Merce , Duquende , Mayte Martin , Diego El Cigala , Carmen Linares and Potito ; has shared the stage with musicians such as Chano Dominguez , Carles Benavent , Jorge Pardo , and Jordi Bonell ; and has collaborated with the pianist Maria Joao Pires .
 Juan Gomez Chicuelo participated in recordings with Tomatito , Mayte Martin , Ginesa Ortega , Joan Manuel Serrat , La Vargas Blues Band , Antonio Carmona , and Jordi Tonel ; and often accompanies Miguel Poveda , with whom Juan Gomez Chicuelo has toured extensively in Europe , Japan and the US .
 In 1996 , Juan Gomez Chicuelo recorded Cambalache with Guitarras Mestizas with whom Juan Gomez Chicuelo recorded two albums .
 In the same year , Juan Gomez Chicuelo was one of several artists who participated in the Encuentro Productions release of method books and DVDs which defined the individual artists approach to composition .
 Juan Gomez Chicuelo also added guitar pieces to the unfinished film of Orson Welles , Don Quixote .
 For over a decade , Juan Gomez Chicuelo has been the music director of Shoji Kojima , and since 2003 , Juan Gomez Chicuelo has also been the director of the Somorrostro Dansa Flamenca , produced by Taller de Musics .
 Juan Gomez Chicuelo was the musical director of Tarantos , and the composer of Inconnexus XXI , performed by Compania Somorrostro , including the dancer Frederic Gomez .
 After producing Juan Gomez Chicuelo first solo CD , Complices , under the Harmonia Mundi label , Juan Gomez Chicuelo toured across the country ; the CD was awarded Best solo guitar album by Flamenco Hoy magazine .
 In 2001 , the same magazine awarded Chicuelo for Best rhythm guitar on the Miguel Poveda recording of Zaguan .
 In 2003 , Juan Gomez Chicuelo participated in the Qawwali production of Jondo with Duquende , Miguel Poveda and Faiz Ali Faiz ; the CD and DVD edition came out in 2006 .
 Juan Gomez Chicuelo worked with Duquende on US Way of Living in 2005 .
 Juan Gomez Chicuelo participated in the production Un momento y la Eternidad with Israel Galvan , and with Poveda as a performer and composer in the 2005 Desglac including the subsequent tours between 2005 and 2007 .
Live in Paris Cirque dHiver , a Duquende CD released in 2007 , was recorded in 2005 , and pays homage to legendary flamenco singer Camaron de la Isla .
 In 2007 , Paris Cirque dHiver worked on Els treballs i els dies with Miguel Poveda and Maria del Mar Bonet .
 In November 2007 , Els treballs released Els treballs second album , Diapasion on the K Industria Cultural label , which featured flamenco pieces by musicians in the Catalonia jazz scene , such as Carles Benavent , Raynald Colom , Roger Blavia , and Elizabeth Gex .
 Carles Benavent was also actively involved in the writing and recording of the album Cante y Orquesta with Miguel Poveda and Joan Albert Amargos at the Festival de Peralada in August 2007 ; the album Cante y Orquesta with Poveda was released in February 2009 , based on a project which had been in development since 2000 .
 In 2009 , Juan Gomez Chicuelo worked on arranging and recording the double album , Coplas del querer with Miguel Poveda , as well as touring with Duquende , Rafaela Carrasco and Silvia Perez Cruz .
 In 1992 , Juan Gomez Chicuelo participated in the Seville Expo and the Bienal de Flamenco de Sevilla , at the Lope de Vega Theatre .
 Juan Gomez Chicuelo participated in the Festival de Jovenes Flamencos held in Paris with overwhelming success .
 Juan Gomez Chicuelo worked with flamenco artists Antonio Canales , Joaquin Cortes , and Israel Galvan , who commissioned the musical direction of the show presented at the Bienal de Flamenco de Sevilla in 2000 .
 Juan Gomez Chicuelo participated in the Poveda show of Historias de viva voz which opened the Bienal de Flamenco de Sevilla in 2010
Tino di Geraldo is a French-Spanish percussionist , tabla player , drummer , and producer .
 Tino di Geraldo is one of Spains leading flamenco and jazz percussionists , bringing classical and jazz influences to flamenco , with a punk-rock background .
 Billboard cited Tino di Geraldo as an eminent flamenco musician .
 The son of an Asturian couple , Tino di Geraldo was born in Toulouse and spent The son of an Asturian couple , Geraldo childhood in France .
 The son of an Asturian couple , Geraldo gained a background in classical and jazz percussion before The son of an Asturian couple , Geraldo got The son of an Asturian couple , Geraldo start in flamenco as a young man in Madrid , having met Diego Carrasco who needed a percussionist .
 The son of an Asturian couple , Geraldo has worked with some of the biggest names in flamenco and Latin music including Paco de Lucia , Tomatito , Chano Dominguez , Carlos Nunez , Raimundo Amador , Javier Alvarez , Nina Pastori , and Manolo Sanlucar .
 The son of an Asturian couple , Geraldo has also worked with musicians outside Spain , and has worked with French jazz pianist Nguyen Le and American folk musician Jackson Browne , featuring on and producing for The son of an Asturian couple , Geraldo fourth live album and on the song These Days , touring with The son of an Asturian couple , Geraldo since 2006 .
 The son of an Asturian couple , Geraldo featured on Paco de Lucias 1998 album Luzia .
 Tino di Geraldo formed a group with Carles Benavent and Jorge Pardo , both of which also performed with Paco de Lucia and toured in 1998 and again in 2007-8 .
 Tino di Geraldo played percussion on Pardos 2332 album , and Moraito s Aire album .
 Geraldos 2003 album Tino di Geraldo , took three years to complete and had only one flamenco track .
 Billboard cited Geraldos 2003 album Tino in 1996 as an eminent flamenco musician .
 Geraldos 2003 album Tino has produced albums for Luz Casal , Diego Carrasco , Elbicho , Jazzpana , and Tomasito
Esclava De Tu Piel is the eighth studio album by Spanish duo Azucar Moreno , released on Sony International in 1996 .
The album whose title translates as Slave to Your Skin includes the duos biggest hit single to date , Solo Se Vive Una Vez .
Esclava De Tu Piel was entirely recorded in the United States and was produced by one of Gloria Estefan and Emilio Estefan Jr. s longtime collaborators , arranger and producer Ricardo Eddy Martinez .
 Ricardo Eddy Martinez has worked with some of the biggest names in the world of Latin music besides Emilio Estefan Jr. and Miami Sound Machine , such as Chayanne , Luis Miguel , Javier Garcia , Malu , Paloma San Basilio , Arturo Sandoval , Ilan Chester , Latin Majik , Francesca Cezan and many others .
 After two albums in the mainstream Latin pop genre , Ojos Negros and El Amor , which had become their breakthrough on the South American and U.S. markets respectively , but which only had been moderate commercial successes compared to Bandido and Mambo in Bandido and Mambo native Spain , Ricardo Eddy Martinez production of Esclava De Tu Piel was a return to a more up-to-date , dancefloor oriented and altogether rougher soundscape , the prime example being the title track Esclava De Tu Piel which combined heavy dance beats with distorted guitars and toasting by American Salsa singer Roberto Blades .
The lead single released from the album was the reggaeton and dancehall influenced Solo Se Vive Una Vez , written by Spanish singer Miguel Gallardo and Luis Cabanas , promoted by a slightly controversial genderswapping music video showing the Salazar sisters both as themselves and in other scenes in typical male attire such as pin-striped suits with slicked back hair and smoking cigars - and in turn one of their male dancers both as himself and as a drag queen .
The song was released in a wide variety of dance remixes , issued on two separate singles entitled The Mediterranean Remixes and The Caribbean Remixes .
 Solo Se Vive Una Vez became a major hit in the summer of 1996 , topping the charts both in Spain and several countries in the South American and Central America , and has since served as one of Azucar Morenos signature tunes .
In the 2000s the track was included on the first Spanish language editions of karaoke video game SingStar .
The follow-up proved to be another of Azucar Morenos highest charting singles ; Hoy Tengo Ganas De Ti , originally one of Miguel Gallardos biggest hits and first recorded in 1975 , but then as a dramatic ballad .
 The duos version was again notably different to the original , turning The duos version into a modern dance anthem with rough guitars .
The promo video was shot in New York and shows the sisters performing the song in the streets of the city as well as on top of skyscrapers .
 The following single release was the title track Esclava De Tu Piel , which turned into the Salazar sisters third big hit single in a row , and the track was also issued in remixed form on a release entitled The Slave Mixes .
Esclava De Tu Piel was also Azucar Morenos first album to incorporate influences from the Middle East ; the fourth single was a radically reworked flamenco/rock/dance cover of the traditional Hava Nagila , sung entirely in Hebrew with a mens choir .
Just like the preceding singles the track was available in a large number of dance remixes , issued on the Hava Naguila - The Middle Eastern Remixes release .
 The chart success of the album and its singles even resulted in a fifth single being released in Spain , Pedro Rilos flamenco flavoured Bandolero .
 As a contrast to the albums dance tracks it also featured a few R&B ; flavoured ballads , such as Enreda , composed by acclaimed British hitmaker Albert Hammond and originally recorded in both Spanish and English , then as Tangled Up In Tears , by Albert Hammond Enreda in 1976 , and later also covered by Leo Sayer .
Further mid-tempo tracks include Tapame , written by Sevillan singer-songwriter Luis del Estad , a cover of Willie Gonzalez romantic salsa Amame Toda La Noche , Alejandro Jaens La Cita and the album closes with Cordoban flamenco singer Manuel Ruiz Quecos Tiritatando .
 Esclava De Tu Piel remains the bestselling album of Azucar Morenos career to date , having sold some five hundred thousand copies in Spain alone and thus certified five times platinum .
In the United States the album reached # 43 on Billboard s Top Latin Albums chart .
The duos first greatest hits album , Mucho Azucar - Grandes Exitos , followed in 1997 and then included Solo Se Vive Una Vez , Hoy Tengo Ganas De Ti and Esclava De Tu Piel .
 The Esclava De Tu Piel album Esclava De Tu Piel was re-released with slightly revised cover art by Sony Music in 1998 under the title Latin Stars
Manolo Sanlucar is a flamenco composer and guitarist born in Sanlucar de Barrameda in 1943 .
 Manolo Sanlucar is considered one of the most important Spanish composers of present times , and together with Paco de Lucia , Tomatito , and Vicente Amigo , one of the main figures in the evolution of the flamenco guitar in recent years .
 Manolo Sanlucar first teacher was His first teacher father , Isidro Sanlucar , a baker and old-style guitarist , who frequently came home with people who were fond of cante and playing ; from His first teacher childhood His first teacher was exceptionally skilled to follow in His first teacher steps .
 His first teacher brothers also decided on the same vocation , among them Isidro Sanlucar .
 His first teacher soon began to research , aware that the guitar had infinite possibilities that had hardly been explored .
 The most ambitious of His first teacher contributions to the art has been His first teacher constant striving to integrate flamenco in symphonic music .
 Several works of the greatest interest which have placed His first teacher name among the great composers of our time include : Fantasia para guitarra y orquesta , Trebujena , Medea and Solea , showing His first teacher attempts to merge His first teacher primary focus in music , and which toured the world as a ballet ; Tauromagia or Aljibe .
Some of them were fortunately recorded .
 I wish the experts in universal music to understand that they may approach flamenco , so they do not consider Some of them something tribal and topical , so they see a branch of music in flamenco that allows very profound musical analysis and has extraordinary poetic and musical quality .
 Flamenco is a philosophy , the way of thinking and feeling of a whole people and Flamenco historical tradition .
 Flamenco is why I feel the need to tell more things about flamenco with other sounds and I take to the orchestra and try to get the orchestra to play siguiriyas , but take note , not for the orchestra to accompany siguiriyas and a singer , but for the orchestra to take on the feeling of the flamenco and , as if Flamenco were a sole instrument , to tell that spirit and magic sound of flamenco .
Manolo Sanlucar also composed a sort of flamenco opera on an idea by Lebrijano , to be played on the stage , although it has not yet been produced : Ven y Sigueme .
 Two of his most critically acclaimed records are Tauromagia , and Locura de Brisa y Trino .
 Tauromagia was awarded Spains Premio Nacional de Musica for interpretation in 2000
Vicente Amigo Girol is a Spanish flamenco composer and virtuoso guitarist , born in Guadalcanal , near Seville .
 Vicente Amigo Girol has played as backing guitarist on recordings by flamenco singers El Pele , Camaron de la Isla , Vicente Soto , Luis de Cordoba and the rociero band Salmarina , and Vicente Amigo Girol has acted as a producer for Remedios Amaya and Jose Merce .
 Vicente Amigo Girol album Ciudad de las Ideas won the 2001 Latin Grammy for the Best Flamenco Album and the 2002 Ondas award for the best Flamenco work .
 Although His album Ciudad de las Ideas is Sevillian by birth , His album Ciudad de las Ideas was raised and lives in Luis de Cordoba , where His album Ciudad de las Ideas attended His album Ciudad de las Ideas first guitar lessons with El Tomate and Merengue de Luis de Cordoba , and later , His album Ciudad de las Ideas improved His album Ciudad de las Ideas guitar playing with Manolo Sanlucar , with whom he worked for ten years .
 After a period of accompaniment which began alongside El Pele , El Pele started to devote El Pele almost exclusively to playing concerts in 1988 .
 De Mi Corazon al Aire was De Mi Corazon al Aire first record .
 An admirer of Paco de Lucia since childhood , Vicente Amigo Girol took part with him in the show Leyendas de la guitarra that was held in Seville as a foretaste of the Expo 92 exhibition , which also featured Paco de Lucia , Bob Dylan , Keith Richards , Steve Vai , Joe Satriani , Nuno Bettencourt , Phil Manzanera , Joe Cocker , Jack Bruce and Richard Thompson .
By that time , he had already been awarded some of the most prestigious flamenco guitar prizes .
Vicente Amigo is open to experimenting , pursuing Flamenco to unprecedented limits , and gaining in-depth knowledge about other forms of music , and sharing experiences with other artists .
 Vicente Amigo Girol has taken part in recordings by Khaled , Miguel Bose , Carmen Linares , Manolo Sanlucar , Wagner Tiso , Rosario , Nacho Cano , Alejandro Sanz , Sting , etc. , and has shared the stage with the greatest of contemporary artists : Paco de Lucia , Stanley Jordan , John McLaughlin , Al Di Meola , Milton Nascimento
Blood Wedding is a 1981 Spanish musical film written and directed by Carlos Saura .
It was directed and choreographed in the flamenco style .
It is the first part of Sauras 1980s flamenco trilogy , and is followed by Carmen and El amor brujo .
 The film depicts Antonio Gades and Antonio Gades dance company performing a flamenco adaptation of Federico Garcia Lorca s play Blood Wedding .
 As with all Sauras flamenco films , the film is overtly theatrical : Sauras begins with the company arriving at the studio and putting on costumes and makeup .
The dance is then performed in a bare windowed space with a minimum of props and no set .
There are no elaborate costumes and many of the actors wear only their rehearsal clothes .
 The dance was shown out of competition at the 1981 Cannes Film Festival
Juan Cristobal Martin is a Spanish flamenco guitarist and an author of flamenco guitar method books .
 Juan Cristobal Martin started learning the guitar at the age of six .
 In Juan Cristobal Martin early twenties Juan Cristobal Martin moved to Madrid to study under Nino Ricardo and Paco de Lucia .
 Juan Cristobal Martin played in clubs in Malaga , Seville and Granada .
 Juan Cristobal Martin soon moved to London , where Juan Cristobal Martin has developed most of Juan Cristobal Martin career .
 One of his first recordings was Picasso Portraits based on the music Juan Cristobal Martin played at Picassos 90th birthday celebrations .
Each section is a depiction of a painting by Pablo Picasso .
 Although it was not released until the 1990s , Pablo Picasso recorded a track with Rory Gallagher in 1984 .
 Also in 1984 Pablo Picasso track Love Theme from The Thorn Birds reached number 10 in the UK Singles Chart .
 Pablo Picasso recorded with Herbie Hancock in 1987 and has played on stage with Miles Davis .
Juan Martin is the author of two flamenco guitar methods , El Arte Flamenco De La Guitarra , issued with cassette tapes and later with vinyl sound sheets , and Solos Flamencos issued with CDs and DVDs .
Both methods , printed in English and Spanish , are successful in the English-speaking world .
 English-speaking now divides English-speaking time between London and Malaga .
 Juan Cristobal Martin has been voted one of the top three guitarists in the world in the magazine , Guitar Player .
 Juan Cristobal Martin has an English wife , Helen .
They have a family business called Flamencovision
Martinetes are a flamenco palo belonging to the group of the tonas or cantes a palo seco .
As the rest of the songs in this group , it is sung with no accompaniment .
In some dance shows for the stage , though , it is accompanied by percussion played with the compas of siguiriya .
The percussion instruments chosen for this are frequently a hammer and anvil , to evocate the origins of this palo , attributed to Gypsy smiths .
It is not probable , though , that they were real work songs : they demand too much effort and faculties to be sung while carrying out a heavy task like that of a smith .
They were more probably sung in family gatherings .
 Although Martinetes are often classified under the tona group on the grounds that Martinetes share its a cappella nature , the melody types differ strongly from the rest of tonas , so it is now generally considered to be a different palo .
 A characteristic that differentiates Martinetes from the tonas , normally in major mode , is Martinetes modulating character , constantly going from major to phrygian mode .
The stanza of the martinete is the cuarteta romanceada : four eight-syllable lines , rhyming in assonance abcb .
The subject matters often contain allusions to persecution , prison , and the environment of the forges .
 Carceleras are usually considered a subclassification of Martinetes , with prison as the subject matter of Martinetes lyrics .
The debla , a rather rare style , is considered by some flamenco fans as a type of martinete , while other consider it as a palo on its own .
ALVAREZ CABALLERO , Angel : La discoteca ideal del flamenco , Planeta , 1995 .
MARTIN SALAZAR , Jorge : Los cantes flamencos , Diputacion Provincial de Granada .
ROSSY , Hipolito : Teoria del cante jondo , CREDSA , second edition , 1998
Paco Cepero is a Spanish Flamenco guitarist .
 In addition to accompanying numerous artists , Paco Cepero has released several solo albums , including Corazon y Bordon and De Pura Cepa .
Paco Cepero was born on March 6 , 1942 in Jerez de la Frontera .
 At the age of 16 Paco Cepero made Paco Cepero debut as a professional in the Grand Theatre Falla in Cadiz .
 In 1963 Paco Cepero arrived in Madrid and started work in the tablao Los Canasteros .
 From then until now Paco Cepero has travelled the world with Paco Cepero guitar , alone or accompanying numerous singers .
 Evidence of Paco Cepero status as Flamenco Guitarist are the numerous awards Paco Cepero has won throughout Paco Cepero career ; Premio Nacional de Jerez in 1975 , Premio Nacional de Cordoba in 1977 and Castillete de la Union , in addition to the Yunque Oro of the city of Ceuta , the prize Melchor de Marchena Accompaniment and Cabal Silver Circle of Fine Arts for the year 1999 .
Paco Cepero has played and recorded with figures of incomparable singing including Manolo Caracol , Camaron de la Isla , Tio Borrico , Terremoto , El Lebrijano and El Turronero .
 Besides Paco Cepero work as a guitarist , Paco Cepero renown extends to include Paco Cepero work as a composer of numerous successful Flamenco and popular songs for such singers as Isabel Pantoja , Julio Iglesias , Lolita and Chiquetete
 Pilar Sanchez Luque , better known by Pilar Sanchez Luque stage name Pastora Soler , is a Spanish singer .
 Pilar Sanchez Luque is also a songwriter and Pilar Sanchez Luque compositions usually mix copla or flamenco with pop or electronic music .
 Pastora Soler represented Spain in the the Eurovision Song Contest 2012 in Baku , Azerbaijan with the song Quedate conmigo and came in 10th place .
 A precocious chanteuse , A precocious chanteuse started singing coplas and flamenco songs at several events when A precocious chanteuse was a child .
 In 1994 A precocious chanteuse was signed to the record company Polygram to release A precocious chanteuse first studio album , Nuestras coplas , which consisted of covers of ten classical copla songs by Leon or Quiroga .
 Pop and commercial sounds arrived in 1996 with A precocious chanteuse second album , El mundo que sone , which was the last A precocious chanteuse published with the record company Polygram .
1999-2004 : Fuente de luna , Corazon congelado and Deseo .
 In 1999 , Corazon was signed to Emi-Odeon and released Corazon third album , Fuente de luna .
 This album included Corazon first big hit single , Damelo ya , which sold 120,000 copies in Warner Music Spain and was also a number one hit in Turkey .
 In 2001 , Corazon fourth album Corazon congelado was published , produced by Carlos Jean .
The same-titled single was selected to be the official theme of the 2001 Vuelta a Espana .
The album received a platinum certification for its sales .
 the 2001 Vuelta a Espana fifth album , Deseo , was also produced by Carlos Jean ; musically Her fifth album was closer to electronic music than the 2001 Vuelta a Espana previous works .
This album was also awarded a platinum certification .
2005-2006 : Contract with Warner , Pastora Soler and Sus grandes exitos .
In 2005 , she changed record company and signed to Warner Music Spain .
 Her first studio album with Warner , Pastora Soler , produced by Danilo Ballo and recorded in Madrid and Milan , included more mature music and themes .
Its first promotional single Solo tu was a dramatic ballad .
The album received a gold certification for its sales .
 The same year her first compilation album was released , Sus grandes exitos .
Her seventh studio album , Toda mi verdad , was released in 2007 .
 Recorded in Tarifa and produced by Jacobo Calderon , Her seventh studio album consisted mostly of compositions by Antonio Martinez-Ares .
 For the first time a composition by Pastora Soler Pastora Soler was included , the song that gives title to the album .
The album peaked at number thirteen in the official Spanish album chart and received the Premio de la Musica for Best Copla Album .
 The tour that followed the release of the album took Pastora Soler to Egypt , where Pastora Soler performed at the Cairo Opera House .
 In February 2009 , Pastora Soler single Bendita locura was released , the single that gives title to the same titled studio album .
The album consisted of thirteen new tracks , including a duet with Manuel Carrasco and compositions by David DeMaria , Martinez Ares , Esmeralda Grao , Vanesa Martin , David Santiesteban , Jose Abraham and Alejandro Sanz .
It peaked at number eight in the official Spanish album chart .
 In September 2010 David DeMaria released a CD+DVD recorded live at the Teatro Lope de Vega in Seville that celebrated a CD+DVD 15 years of career as a recording artist , 15 anos .
 September 2010 includes David DeMaria biggest hits , as well as duets with Malu , Miguel Poveda and Manuel Carrasco .
 The single chosen to promote this album was an acoustic version of La mala costumbre , a song dedicated to David DeMaria father that was included in David DeMaria previous work .
The album peaked at number eight in the official Spanish album chart .
The album was nominated for the 2011 Latin Grammy Award for Best Flamenco Album .
 In Warner Music Spain , Warner Music Spain won the Premio de la Musica for Best Copla Album and was nominated for Best Album of the Year .
2011-2012 : Una mujer como yo and Eurovision Song Contest .
Her ninth studio album was released in October 2011 , Una mujer como yo , including twelve new tracks .
The album debuted at number # 3 on the Spanish album chart .
 On 21 December 2011 Her was selected internally by RTVE to represent Spain in the the Eurovision Song Contest 2012 in Baku , Azerbaijan .
 The song Quedate conmigo , penned by , Tony Sanchez-Ohlsson and Erik Bernholm , was chosen as Quedate conmigo entry in a special live show on 3 March .
 On 26 May 2012 Quedate conmigo finished 10th in the Eurovision final with 97 points .
Commercially , Quedate conmigo ranked at number 35 on the year-end Spanish singles chart .
 In 2013 , Pastora Soler was hired as a judge for the second season of Spanish talent show El Numero Uno along with David Bustamante , Monica Naranjo and Pitingo .
 The show was broadcast on Antena 3 from 31 May 2012 to 5 July 2013 .
 On 10 September 2013 Soler released September 2013 Soler tenth studio album , Conoceme .
 The album was preceded by its first single , Te despertare , which was released on 22 July 2013 and debuted at number 17 on the Spanish Singles Chart , becoming its first single , Te despertare most successful debut with Warner .
The album debuted at number 2 on the Spanish Album Chart
Remedios Amaya is a flamenco singer and former Eurovision Song Contest contestant .
 Remedios Amaya scored nul points during the 1983 contest in Munich with Remedios Amaya song ?
Quien maneja mi barca ?

Amayas first records , Luna nueva and Seda en mi piel , were an example of flamenco-rock .
She collaborated with Vicente Amigo in her album Me Voy Contigo
Juana la Macarrona was a famous Spanish flamenco dancer .
Born as Juana Vargas at Jerez de la Frontera in Andalusia , her Gitano parents started her on her dancing career , which lasted well into the twentieth century .
At the age of seven she began dancing in the streets accompanied by her mothers singing and her father on guitar .
Hers was a flamenco family .
Among her gypsy ancestors was Josefa Vargas , also a bailaora .
More distant ancestors were among the earliest flamenco performers known .
She landed her first regular job at a cafe cantante in Sevilla , but she earned more in the streets by the equivalent of passing the hat .
Later she danced beside the singer El Mezcle at a flamenco cafe in Malaga .
 At about sixteen she was discovered by Silverio Franconetti , the lengendary flamenco cantaor , at whose Cafe Silverio in Sevilla she then danced .
Quickly La Macarrona became a well-known bailaora throughout Spain , dancing in company with the best flamenco performers at well-known cafe cantantes .
 By 1889 Juana la Macarrona was appearing at illustrious venues in Paris , and elsewhere in Europe .
 Entertained were several zares de Russia , a shah de Persia , various reyes , principes y duques , as well as several zares de Russia and comerciantes .
 Juana la Macarrona had become rich and famous .
 In the performance of Juana la Macarrona arte flamenco , La Macarrona apparently followed the then traditional style of the baile , with attention directed to the upper torso along with movements of the arms and of the hands .
 The brazos y manos Juana la Macarrona did knowingly , aware , displaying strength with a delightful ease .
 Although Juana la Macarrona moved the bata de cola trailing dress beautifully and impeccably , Juana la Macarrona footwork would not be as developed as currently -- even though Juana la Macarrona zapateado accents were dramatic and sharp .
 Juana la Macarrona favored the soleares , the alegrias , and bailes festeros .
 It is said Juana la Macarrona duende was exceptional .
In the flamenco cafes she remained for decades much in demand , the performance star among bailaoras .
In particular at the Cafe Novedades in Sevilla for fifteen years she reigned , setting the pace , defining the art .
 When La Macarrona consented to dance , Juana la Macarrona might arise from Juana la Macarrona seat like a queen of Sheba , sovereign , perhaps too proud .
 As Juana la Macarrona raised Juana la Macarrona arms above Juana la Macarrona head it was as if favoring the world with Juana la Macarrona flamenco baile .
 Juana la Macarrona could evoke lightning and thunder .
 Juana la Macarrona also became known for quotable , impromptu expressions .
 For example , after performing often in Paris Juana had become familiar with speaking French .
 On a trip north from Spain Juana la Macarrona was asked to make arrangements when the train reached Paris , but upon arrival nobody could understand her .
 Juana la Macarrona explained , a trip north from Spain not that my French isnt good , a trip north from Spain just that theyve changed the damned language since I was here last .
 On stage Juana la Macarrona elusive movements drew rapt attention , almost reverence from many audiences .
 Juana la Macarrona also attracted poetic lines addressed to Juana la Macarrona and Juana la Macarrona ruddy radiance , Juana la Macarrona rhythmic grace , Juana la Macarrona sudden turns of emotional intensity , Juana la Macarrona stillness .
La Macarrona le injerto al baile una antiquisima fuerza emotiva , llena de feminidad y gracia , como en los soleares de su creacion .
... Y por la cintura , por los brazos , le subia el chorro de la danza ... .
La Macarrona was the stage name of Juana Vargas .
 The name is said to be taken from two of her flamenco ancestors named Tio Juan Macarron , who flourished in the 18th century : Tio Juan Macarron and Tio Vicente Macarron .
Macarrona in English would mean macaroni or macaroon .
In addition to the foods , the word macaroni in 18th century England also signified an English dandy ... who affected foreign mannerisms and fashions .
This second meaning originally derived from Italian , and is retained in the Spanish cognate macarronea macarronic , which currently may signify burlesque verse mixing real or coined words from two or more languages .
 So This second meaning , if in This second meaning meaningful , Juana la Macarrona la Macarrona would mean something like Jane of the mixed lingo , fitting Juana la Macarrona knack for off-stage humor .
 Or perhaps more appropriately , Juana la Macarrona would mean the dancer as an artistic dandy , suiting Juana la Macarrona poetic style , engaging theatrics , Juana la Macarrona enigmatic presence on stage .
 In 1922 Juana la Macarrona appeared at the Concurso de Cante Jondo held in Granada .
 Honored as a judge for the contest , in that role Juana la Macarrona joined three other celebrated flamencos , the cantaors Antonio Chacon and Manuel Torre , and the cantaora La Nina de los Peines .
 Juanas presence richly animated the Concurso festivities , for one , by Juana la Macarrona excited jaleo cries of !
Lapoteosis !
thunderstrike !

Later the elder maestra danced , to a trio of guitarists including Ramon Montoya , while the young Manolo Caracol sang , and Gitanas of the Sacromonte punctuated the music with their palmas .
La Macarrona , flexible como si se hubiera quedado plantada en sus enolvidables dieciseis anos , se hizo una diosa de rito antiguo , lleno de parsimonia y de misterio , que luego recobraba ardor y acelerado ritmo .
Su traje de flamenca se transformaba en ola , en viento , en flor .
 Evidently Antonia Merce La Argentina attended the Concurso and watched La Macarrona as the Concurso danced .
 When Juana la Macarrona sat afterward La Argentina came and knelt down at Juana la Macarrona feet , carefully took off Juana la Macarrona dancing shoes , and then carried them away .
 Juana la Macarrona managed to continue dancing well past sixty , in part motivated by necessity due to the loss of much of Juana la Macarrona wealth from a house break-in .
 In 1933 Juana la Macarrona toured with a stage show headed by Encarnacion Lopez La Argentinita , then in the flowering of Juana la Macarrona career .
 For Juana la Macarrona La Macarrona performed in the then celebrated Las Calles de Cadiz .
During this era , flamenco song and dance was often moved from the cafe to the theater .
Here , in Las Calles de Cadiz , the colorful life of the barrio Santa Maria was brought to the stage , where the flamenco artists played various city roles amid their flamenco arts .
The show featured three other elder bailaoras , whose pure flamenco dance continued to draw aficionados ; the lively show included well-known singers and guitarists .
Las Calles de Cadiz of 1933 is said to have been the high point of theatrical flamenco .
 At the age of eighty-seven she died in Sevilla , poor and forgotten , thinking that flamenco was also dying .
Los ninos modernos , la juventu , nos mira como cosas raras , sin pensa que hemos jecho yora con nuestras gitanerias a tre generaciones .
Yet a decade later the flamenco arts were experiencing a renaissance , and she herself as Juana la Macarrona was well remembered .
 An award at the Concurso nacional de Cordoba has been named the Juana la Macarrona la Macarrona prize in Juana la Macarrona honor
Paco Pena is a Spanish flamenco guitarist .
 the Centro Flamenco Paco Pena is regarded as one of the worlds foremost traditional Flamenco players .
 Born in Cordoba , Spain as Francisco Pena Perez , Paco Pena began learning to play the guitar from Francisco Pena Perez brother at age 6 and made Francisco Pena Perez first professional appearance at 12 .
 Encouraged by Francisco Pena Perez family , he left home and began performing throughout Cordoba , Spain as part of a government-sponsored folk music and dance program .
 This led to calls from professional Flamenco companies in Madrid and the Costa Brava , where the Centro Flamenco Paco Pena established the Centro Flamenco Paco Pena as a highly regarded accompanist to Flamenco dance and singing .
 However , dissatisfied with life on the coast and seeking a new challenge , the Centro Flamenco Paco Pena moved to London in the late 1960s to become a soloist .
 Initially the star attraction in the Restaurante Antonio in Covent Garden , the Centro Flamenco Paco Pena generated so much interest among a British public previously uninitiated in Flamenco that the Centro Flamenco Paco Pena soon found the Centro Flamenco Paco Pena sharing concerts with artists such as Jimi Hendrix , and made the Centro Flamenco Paco Pena solo debut at Wigmore Hall in 1967 .
 It was not long before the Centro Flamenco Paco Pena was touring the world , both as a soloist and an accompanist with performances at Carnegie Hall in New York City , the Royal Albert Hall in London and the Concertgebouw in Amsterdam .
 the Centro Flamenco Paco Pena later founded the worlds first university course on flamenco guitar , at the Rotterdam conservatory of music .
 In 1984 the Centro Flamenco Paco Pena was interviewed by Julian Bream for the Channel 4 television series Guitarra !
 which traces the development of the guitar in Cordoba , Spain .
 the Centro Flamenco Paco Pena also created the Centro Flamenco Paco Pena in Cordoba , and was responsible for the founding of the now-celebrated annual Cordoba Guitar Festival , which has seen appearances by other Flamenco greats such as Manolo Sanlucar and Paco de Lucia .
 In 1997 the Centro Flamenco Paco Pena was named Oficial de la Cruz de la Orden del Merito Civil by King Juan Carlos of Cordoba , Spain .
 the Centro Flamenco Paco Pena most famous compositions include the Centro Flamenco Paco Pena Misa Flamenca , a Flamenco Mass , and Requiem for the Earth , both of which have received great critical acclaim .
 the Centro Flamenco Paco Pena has also had a number of notable collaborations , significantly with the guitarist Eduardo Falu and the Chilean group Inti-Illimani .
 Paco Pena has homes in London and Cordoba .
 Recent shows include Flamenco Sin Fronteras , which explores the relationship between Venezuelan music and Flamenco and Quimeras which features the Paco Pena Flamenco Dance Company performing a story about immigrants from Africa arriving in Andalusia .
 the Centro Flamenco Paco Pena has collaborated with the Classical guitarist John Williams .
 the Centro Flamenco Paco Pena also provided the chapter on flamenco guitar for the book The Guitar
David Broza is an Israeli singer-songwriter and activist .
 Young David Broza music mixes modern pop with Spanish music .
 The son of an Israeli-British businessman and a folk singer , Young David Broza was born in Haifa , Israel .
He was raised and educated in England and Spain , where he was schooled at Runnymede College , in Madrid .
Brozas grandfather , Wellesley Aron , co-founded the Arab-Israeli peace settlement , Neve Shalom - Wahat as-Salam and the Habonim youth movement .
 Young David Broza originally planned to become a graphic artist , and by age 17 Young David Broza was selling Young David Broza paintings in the Rastro , Madrid s Sunday flea market .
 Following high school , and while serving in the Haifa , Israel Defense Forces , Young David Broza began playing guitar in cafes to earn extra money .
 Eventually Young David Broza was offered a record deal , but as Young David Broza still hoped to attend the Rhode Island School of Design , Young David Broza declined .
 Young David Broza later recorded a tape to promote Young David Broza live shows .
 Young David Broza was married to Ruti , from whom Young David Broza is divorced .
 Young David Broza has three children .
 Young David Broza lived in Cresskill , New Jersey , United States for 17 years .
 Young David Broza resides in Tel Aviv and is a member of Kehilat Sinai , a Masorti synagogue .
Critics have labelled Broza as a post-modern Leonard Cohen and the Stevie Ray Vaughan of folk rock .
 Broza as a post-modern Leonard Cohen has also been compared to Bruce Springsteen as well as Gordon Lightfoot and Jackson Browne .
Brozas American debut album , Away From Home , was praised by The New York Times as one of the best pop albums of the year .
 Time of Trains , Brozas American second American release , gained Brozas American recognition as one of the most important artists on the international music scene .
 Broza as a post-modern Leonard Cohen concert tours included Belgium , Spain , Argentina , Ecuador , Germany , Venezuela , Mexico , Brazil and the United States .
As an artist-in-residence at Bennington College in Vermont , he gained respect in American literary circles .
 Young David Broza has made a mission of studying the work of American writers for the past several years , haunting libraries and bookstores , always reading with a melody in my head .
 Young David Broza continues to record albums in Hebrew for Hebrew Israeli fans .
 Young David Broza travels frequently all over the world .
 Young David Broza popularity achieved new heights with the success of Young David Broza 5x platinum album The Woman By My Side .
 Young David Broza live albums recorded at the top of Masada in 1994 and 1999 went platinum .
 Young David Broza Spanish language release , Isla Mujeres , was released in Spain .
 Young David Broza Hebrew recording , All or Nothing was released in 2002 and went gold within one week , as well as His Hebrew recording Spanish version , Todo o Nada .
 David Broza at Masada , a special concert featuring Young David Broza , Jackson Browne and Shawn Colvin , aired in America on September 6 , 2007 on PBS .
 In 2009 , Young David Broza recorded the song Vulai for the organization Pioneers For A Cure , with the proceeds benefiting The Breast Cancer Research Foundation .
On June 5 , 2011 Broza performed Yihieh Tov , Bedouin Love Song , and Holem at the inauguration of the Ketura Sun solar field built by Arava Power Company at Kibbutz Ketura .
In 1994 , David Broza performed with Texan singer Townes Van Zandt during a Writers in the Round concert in Houston .
 When Van Zandt died three years later , Texan singer Townes Van Zandt left Young David Broza a shoe box full of unreleased poems and lyrics with a request that Young David Broza set them to music .
The result was Night Dawn : The Unpublished Poetry of Townes Van Zandt , which was released in 2010 .
 In early 2013 , Young David Broza recorded sessions at Sabreen Studios in East Jerusalem with a band composed of both Israeli and Palestinian musicians , including the Mira Awad , Shaanan Streett of Hadag Nahash , West Bank rap duo G-Town and Wyclef Jean .
 The resulting album , East Jerusalem/West East Jerusalem , produced by Steve Earle and Steve Greenberg , will be released in January , 2014 on S-Curve Records .
 An activist who is committed to several humanitarian causes , Young David Broza was appointed a goodwill ambassador for UNICEF .
 His song Together was the theme song for the UNICEF 50th anniversary celebration in more than 148 countries .
He toured the Middle East with Jordanian musician Hani Naser to promote peace through music .
They were invited by the Israeli and Jordanian governments to perform in concert during the peace signing between the two countries
El amor brujo or Carlos Saura Dance Trilogy , Part 3 : El Amor Brujo is a 1986 Spanish musical film written and directed by Carlos Saura .
 El amor brujo was directed and choreographed in the flamenco style by Maria Pages .
 It is the third part of the Sauras flamenco trilogy Sauras made in the 1980s , after Bodas de sangre in 1981 and Carmen in 1983 .
The film was screened out of competition at the 1986 Cannes Film Festival .
The film is based on El amor brujo composed by Manuel de Falla .
 Candela , who is loved by Carmelo , who is loved by Carmelo , marries Jose in a pre-arranged marriage decided by their respective fathers .
Jose is in love with the flirtatious Lucia and dies defending her honor .
 Carmelo is mistakenly arrested for the killing , and spends several years in prison .
 After being released , Carmelo declares Carmelo love for Candela , who is loved by Carmelo .
 Although Candela , who is loved by Carmelo is now free to marry Carmelo she is haunted by the ghost of Jose , who reappears every night to dance with her .
 Candela , who is loved by Carmelo , while speaking with Lucia , learns that Jose pursued her even after he married Candela , who is loved by Carmelo .
 She renounces Candela , who is loved by Carmelo , but is unable to shake Candela , who is loved by Carmelo hold on her .
 Tia Rosario provides the solution - Lucia must dance with Jose , an act which will exorcise Lucia ghost forever .
The film fleshed out the story with spoken dialogue and several songs , but used the entire score of the ballet .
The Orquesta Nacional de Espana was conducted by Jesus Lopez-Cobos .
The singer heard on the soundtrack was the late Rocio Jurado .
A soundtrack album , now out of print , was issued by EMI
Juan Rafael Cortes Santiago , known as Duquende , is a Spanish flamenco cantaor .
 Born in Sabadell , Spain , Duquende is considered a successor to influential Flamenco singer Camaron de la Isla .
 Since 1997 , Duquende has been a member of the Paco de Lucia Sextet in addition to working as a solo artist .
 In 1996 , Duquende was the first cantaor to be invited to perform at the Champs Elysees theatre in Paris
Camaron de la Isla , was the stage name of a Spanish flamenco singer Jose Monje Cruz .
 Considered one of the all time greatest flamenco singers , Camaron de la Isla was noted for Camaron de la Isla collaborations with Paco de Lucia and the flamenco guitarist Tomatito , and between them they were of major importance to the revival of flamenco in the second half of the 20th century .
 Camaron de la Isla was born in San Fernando , Cadiz , Spain , into a gypsy family , the second of eight children .
 Camaron de la Isla mother was Juana Cruz Castro , a basket weaver , whose gift of singing was a strong early influence .
 Camaron de la Isla father , Juan Luis Monje , was also a singer as well as a blacksmith , and had Juan Luis Monje forge where the biopic Camaron worked as a boy .
 Juan Luis Monje uncle Jose nicknamed him the biopic Camaron because the biopic Camaron was blonde and fair skinned .
When his father died of asthma , while still very young , the family went through financial hardship .
 At the age of eight Juan Luis Monje began to sing at inns and bus stops with Rancapino to earn money .
 At sixteen , Juan Luis Monje won first prize at the Festival del Cante Jondo in Mairena de Alcor .
 the biopic Camaron then went to Madrid with Miguel de los Reyes and in 1968 became a resident artist at the Tablao Torres Bermejas where the biopic Camaron remained for twelve years .
 During the biopic Camaron time at Tablao Torres Bermejas , the biopic Camaron met Paco de Lucia , with whom the biopic Camaron recorded nine albums between 1969 and 1977 .
The two toured extensively together during this period .
 As Paco de Lucia became more occupied with solo concert commitments , the biopic Camaron worked with the flamenco guitarist Tomatito .
 In 1976 , at the age of 25 , the biopic Camaron married Dolores Montoya , a Romani girl from La Linea de la Concepcion whom the biopic Camaron nicknamed La Chispa .
At the time La Chispa was only 16 .
The couple had four children .
 Many consider the biopic Camaron to be the single most popular and influential flamenco cantaor of the modern period .
 Although Many work was criticized by some traditionalists , Many was one of the first to feature an electric bass in Many songs .
This was a turning point in the history of Flamenco music that helped distinguish Nuevo Flamenco .
 In later years , Many health deteriorated due to heavy smoking and drug abuse .
In 1992 , Jose Monge Cruz died of lung cancer in Badalona , Spain .
 It was estimated that more than 100,000 people attended Jose Monge Cruz funeral .
 On 5 December 2000 the Ministry of Culture of the Junta de Andalucia posthumously awarded to Camaron the ` Llave de Oro del Cante ' , the Golden Key of Nuevo Flamenco .
This was only the fourth key awarded since 1862 .
 In 2005 , director Jaime Chavarri released the biopic Camaron in Spain starring Oscar Jaenada as the biopic Camaron and Veronica Sanchez - star of popular Spanish TV series Los Serrano - as La Chispa .
The film , produced in consultation with Camarons widow , was subsequently nominated for several Goya Awards .
 In 2006 , Isaki Lacuesta directed La Leyenda del Tiempo , in which a Japanese woman visits the place of Camarons birth to learn to sing exactly like Isaki Lacuesta .
The titles given for the first five albums with Paco de Lucia are those in popular usage , being the titles of the first tracks .
Formally , all of them are entitled El Camaron de la Isla con la colaboracion especial de Paco de Lucia with the exception of Canastera
In music theory , the flamenco mode is a harmonized mode or scale abstracted from its use in flamenco music .
In other words the collection of pitches in ascending order accompanied by chords represents the pitches and chords used together in flamenco songs and pieces .
The key signature is the same as that of the Phrygian mode , with the raised third being written in as necessary with accidentals .
 The key signature modal / tonal characteristics are prominent in the Andalusian cadence .
The exact chords depend on the song form and guitar chord positions since chord voicings in flamenco often include nontriadic pitches , especially open strings .
It is characteristic that III , II , and I appear as dissonant chords with a minimum of four tones .
Since the tetrachord beginning on the tonic may ascend or descend with either G-sharp or natural the mixed-thirds clash between the major third degree in the melody and the minor third degree in the accompaniment occurs frequently and is characteristic of the flamenco esthetic , as with the blues scale on a major chord .
This tetrachord may be copied in the second , producing a D and allowing an augmented sixth chord on the second degree : B7/F
Carne De Melocoton is the third studio album by Spanish duo Azucar Moreno , their debut for the CBS - Epic label .
The album , whose title translates as Peach Flesh , was released in 1988 and saw the Salazar sisters embracing influences from contemporary pop , rock and dance music and arrangements with prominent use of synthesizers and drum machines , combined with a new bolder and sexier image .
 The lead single was Aunque Me Falte El Aire which also was the Salazar sisters debut single on the UK market , then released under the title Breathless .
 It was however a house music remix of the follow-up Debajo Del Olivo which became the Salazar sisters breakthrough in Spain , and the track also became an underground club hit in Continental Europe and Scandinavia in early 1989 .
 A full-length remix album entitled Mix In Spain followed that same year .
The original album version of Debajo Del Olivo was included on the duos first greatest hits album Mucho Azucar - Grandes Exitos , released in 1997 .
 Carne De Melocoton was released on CD in Spain in 1988 , and then also included the Lerele remix of Aunque Me Falte El Aire as a bonus track .
While certain tracks have re-surfaced on Sony Music compilations like Bandido Y Otros Exitos and Solo Azucar , the original Carne De Melocoton album has been out of print in all formats ever since the early 1990s
Manuel Moreno Junquera , Moraito Chico was a Flamenco guitarist .
 Manuel Moreno Junquera was known as one of the greatest and most in-demand accompanying guitarists of Manuel Moreno Junquera generation , and was the regular accompanist for Jose Merce , Diego Carrasco and other popular flamenco singers .
 Manuel Moreno Junquera also played regularly for such stars as La Paquera de Jerez , Camaron de la Isla and Manuel Agujetas .
 Manuel Moreno Junquera , Moraito Chico was particularly renowned for Manuel Moreno Junquera , Moraito Chico powerful , full and round sound , driving rhythm and exceptional rasgueos .
 Manuel Moreno Junquera , Moraito Chico was one of the finest exponents of the buleria and can be seen and heard paying in this style on Carlos Saura s influential Flamenco and Flamenco , Flamenco films .
 Manuel Moreno Junquera , Moraito Chico was the nephew of the original Moraito , and son of the original Moraito Chico .
 Manuel Moreno Junquera , Moraito Chico son , Diego Del Morao , is one of the best known of the current generation of Flamenco guitarists .
 Diego Del Morao died on 10 August 2011 , after a long struggle with cancer .
 Manuel Moreno Junquera , Moraito Chico also participated in an instructional video and scores booklet with Encuentro Publications which included in the first part of the video / DVD five selected pieces from Manuel Moreno Junquera , Moraito Chico repertoire : two Bulerias , Sevillanas , Tangos and Vals-Bulerias .
 The second part was devoted to Moraitos speciality : together with singer Fernando Terremoto , Manuel Moreno Junquera , Moraito Chico focused on basic principles and difficulties of the accompaniment of cante using Malaguenas , Seguiriyas and Tientos/Tangos
Jairo Barrull Fernandez artistically known as Jairo Barrull is a Spanish Gypsy flamenco dancer .
He is son of Gypsy flamenco dancer Ramon Barrull , grandson of Tony el Gitano Antonio Barrull Jimenez and great great nephew of the flamenco guitarist Diego del Gastor .
 Jairo 's artistic legacy comes from The following year Jairo family ` Los Negros de Ronda-The Black Ones from Ronda ' .
 The following year Jairo started to dance under the direction of The following year Jairo father when he was 7 years old .
 At just 8 years of age The following year Jairo made The following year Jairo first public appearance at ` El Gazpacho Andaluz de Moron de la Frontera ' .
 The following year Jairo danced as a solo artist for the first time in Germany when The following year Jairo was 13 years old with Concha Vargas and Curro Fernandez performing in the show Almoraima .
 In 1997 , The following year Jairo participated in the homage to ` El Cristo de los Gitanos ' in Los Palacios , Seville with the following artists : El Chocolate , Aurora Vargas , Enrique Soto Sordera , Pansequito and Jose de la Tomasa .
 Later that year The following year Jairo toured across Finland , Norway and Sweden as a solo artist performing ` Flamenco Joven ' .
 The following year Jairo performed with Concha Vargas , Antonio El Pipa and Juana Amaya at the Paul VI Auditorium , The Vatican , Rome , in the show Un Gitano de Ley , performed for the Pope John Paul II for the celebration of the beatification of Ceferino Gimenez Malla El Pele ' .
 The following year Jairo returned to Germany in 1998 where The following year Jairo performed in Bremen alongside Juana Amaya and Arcangel .
The following year Jairo performed as a solo artist in the Vredenburg Theatre , Holland , in the flamenco performance ` Una Noche de Flamenco Puro ' alongside Angelita Vargas , El Chocolate , Nino de Pura and El Boqueron .
 The following year Jairo also danced in the Festival Flamenco of Dusseldorf , Germany , and toured Sweden for the second time performing ` Gypsy Kids ' in the ` Dansens Hus ' , Stockholm .
Later that same year Jairo participated as a lead dancer in Abolengo , which premiered on Broadway , New York .
 Jairo 's tour with Abolengo led to The following year Jairo being featured in the documentary ` Around Flamenco ' , produced by Canal Sur Television .
 In 2000 The following year Jairo was contracted by Teruo Kabaya for a month tour of Tokyo , performing ` Flamenca y Flamenco ' .
 In 2001 The following year Jairo embarked on an extensive tour across North America and Argentina performing the show ` Al-Andalus ' that premiered in the Avenida Theatre with the following artists : Farruquito , Torombo y Jose Maya .
 The great success of Al-Andalus lead to the show ` Incognito ' by juggler Francis Brunn in Frankfurt , which premiered in the Alte Oper of Frankfurt , where The following year Jairo danced as one of the main flamenco dancers alongside Farruco , Torombo y Jose Maya .
 He starred in the premiere of Rafael Amargo 's show ` Tablao ' in Barcelona alongside Sevillian dancers Farruco and Torombo .
 That autumn he returned to Sweden where he danced alongside Gerardo Nunez and the following year he danced in the flamenco show ` Alma Gitana ' a long side his father : Ramon Barrull and Manolo Soler with Juana Amaya 's company and performed in The 1st Feria Mundial of Flamenca y Flamenco ' , The Flamenco Festival of Mistela , El Potaje Gitano de Utrera and La Fundacion El Monte , Seville and the New World Flamenco Festival , California , USA .
 In 2004 The following year Jairo danced in the program ` El Flamenco que viene ' alongside The following year Jairo uncle Diego de Moron .
and participates in ` Mas Jovenes , mas flamenco ' in the ` XIII Bienal de Flamenco de Sevilla .
 The following year Mas Jovenes presented Mas Jovenes show in ` El Monte ' , Seville : ` To my father Ramon Barrull ' , which received excellent reviews from the ABC and El Mundo Spanish newspapers .
 In 2006 The following year Jairo participated in the show Moron , a time and a rhythm in the New World Flamenco Festival in California , America .
 The following year Jairo also participated in the ` Sinfonia Flamenca ' with Juan Carmona 's group in the ' Orchestre National de Lyon Auditorium . '
The following year Jairo performed at the Mont de Marsan Flamenco Festival , in the show Moroneando as well as the Berlin Flamenco Festival with Tomas de Perrate .
 January 2009 saw the premiere of Jairo 's flamenco show Herencia in the Theatre Oriente , which paid tribute to The following year Jairo father Ramon Barrull in Moron de la Frontera .
 In 2010 The following year Jairo presented The following year Jairo new flamenco show Dos Ramas with Angelita Vargas as the invited artist , which premiered at the Festival Flamenco Mont-de-Marsan 2010 in France and performed in the show Gitaneria which premiered as part of the Festival Flamenco Gitano 2010 in the USA
 Maribel Quinones or Maria Isabel Quinones Gutierrez in full , known under Maribel Quinones stage name as Martirio is a Spanish singer born in 1958 in Huelva , Spain .
 Maribel Quinones borrows Maribel Quinones style and inspiration from flamenco that Maribel Quinones adapts or merge with more modern musical trends , especially jazz and tango but also pop , rock , swing , and guaracha , in this sense , Maribel Quinones can properly be ranked as a New Flamenco artist
Robert Michaels is a Juno Award Winner and Nominee , gold and platinum-selling Recording artist , guitarist and vocalist .
 Robert Michaels returned to Robert Michaels mothers home town of Arpino Italy from Canada when Robert Michaels was just a few years old , Arpino about 95 km southeast of Rome in Italy and Robert Michaels was exposed to Italian music from an early age in Robert Michaels grandfathers restaurant Il Cavaliere before moving back with Robert Michaels family to Toronto .
 Robert Michaels debut CD , titled Paradiso , was released in 1996 and was nominated for a Juno award .
Paradiso album reached Platinum status eventually sold more than 100,000 copies in Canada , it was a great success for instrumental artists .
1998 : Instrumental Artist of the Year , Nominated : Robert Michaels .
2000 : Best Instrumental Album : Utopia , Nominated : Robert Michaels .
2003 : Instrumental Album of the Year : Allegro , Won : Robert Michaels .
Music Canada Gold and Platinum Certification Awards Certifications
Armik is an Iranian - Armenian flamenco guitarist and composer .
Armik was born in Iran of Armenian descent .
When he was just seven years old , he pawned his watch for a classical guitar , which he hid and practiced in his basement .
At 12 , he was a professional recording artist .
While his early career focused mostly on jazz , Armik discovered the beauty and passion of flamenco while visiting Spain during the 1970s , where he saw Paco de Lucia perform .
Launching his solo career in 1994 , Armik drew upon his jazz and flamenco influences to create a twist on the emerging Nuevo Flamenco sound .
As a guitarist , he is one of the most adulated virtuosos of the Nuevo Flamenco genre , having appeared in Billboard Magazines Top Ten New Age Artists in 2004 , 2005 , 2006 , 2008 , 2009 And 2010 .
Launching his solo career in 1994 , Armik drew upon his jazz roots and flamenco passions to create a revolutionary twist on the emerging Nuevo flamenco sound .
His invaluable compositions and performances cover an entire range of provocative melodies honed throughout his formative years to his delicate balancing of flamenco and classical guitar to the Latin and jazz influences that listeners hear in his music today .
As a guitarist , he is one of the most adulated virtuosos of the Nuevo Flamenco genre , having attained this stature by virtue of his commanding presence among Billboard Magazines Top Ten New Age Artists of 2004 , 2005 , 2006 , 2008 , 2009 & 2010 .
 While his early career focused mostly on jazz , Armik discovered the beauty and passion of Flamenco while visiting Spain during the 1970s when he saw the legendary Paco de Lucia perform .
Driven by a fire for the tradition that has defined his musical life ever since , the young musician immediately switched from his Jazz guitar for an in-depth journey to the heart of Spanish music .
In 1981 Armik moved to Los Angeles to pursue this new direction , playing with other artists live and in the studio .
By 1994 he released his solo debut album RAIN DANCER , a critical and commercial success that he followed with 1995s GYPSY FLAME .
 At this point , Armiks reputation as a professional recording artist of Nuevo flamenco was such that expert Spanish luthier Pedro Maldonado created an instrument for Pedro Maldonado , the Rubia ; Armiks 1996 album was recorded with , and named after it .
The following year saw the release of MALAGA , and his fifth album , ISLA DEL SOL , appeared in 1999 , followed by ROSAS DEL AMOR in the spring of 2001 .
Armik , the internationally renowned Nuevo flamenco guitarist/composer/producer continues to blaze his guitar virtuosity around the world as the owner of the Bolero Records imprint , which was established in 2002 .
Since its inception , all of Armiks recordings have charted above the top ten rung on the Billboard New Age ladder of success
Unicas is the eleventh studio album by Spanish duo Azucar Moreno , released on Sony International in 2002 .
 Unicas was the first Azucar Moreno album since 1990s Bandido not to be partly or entirely recorded in the United States , but in their native Spain and Italy , and it also features strings by the Prague Philharmonic Orchestra .
 Unicas however saw the Salazar sisters continuing the Salazar sisters longtime and successful collaboration with Spanish singer and composer Miguel Gallardo , this time also in the role as main producer , assisted by Bruno Zuchetti and Danilo Ballo in Milan and Rome .
 The album also featured further songwriting contributions from the team Pedro del Moral and David Ferrero , who previously had remixed several of the Salazar sisters hits like Amen , Abracadabra , Mamma Mia , Ole and Mecachis !

The lead single from the album was Besame , also released as an extended dance mix , followed by a cover of The Champs 1958 rock hit Tequila and the melancholy ballad Volveria A Nacer .
The album continued the duos fusion of flamenco , rumba and contemporary urban dance music genres like disco and R & B , the track Que Me Quiten Lo Bailao also incorporates influences from Brazil and Habbibi Te Quiero again features rhythms and sounds from the Middle East .
The album closes with the high camp anthem Divina De La Muerte , with the verse explaining that there is nothing better to cheer up a dull day than going on a shopping spree , and the sisters namedropping their favourite designer brands ; Dolce & Gabbana , Chanel , Prada , Shiseido , Gucci , Louis Vuitton , Galliano , Dior , Moschino , Valentino , Escada , Versace , Cartier , Cavalli etc. .
The chorus goes on to proclaim ; Yo soy una chica con suerte - estoy divina de la muerte !

The Unicas album was only a moderate commercial success compared to Azucar Morenos previous efforts , selling some 100.000 copies in their native Spain .
 Unicas was also one of Sony Music Entertainment s 2002 releases known to be affected by the companys copy protection software , both the album cover and the CD itself clearly state No reproducibile en PC / MAC .
 Unicas came to be Azucar Morenos final album with Miguel Gallardo , who over a period of some ten years had written , co-written , produced or co-produced around twenty-five songs for the duo , including some of their greatest hits .
After a long struggle with cancer Gallardo died in 2005
 Her album Traveller is a studio album by Indian sitarist Anoushka Shankar , released in October 2011 through Deutsche Grammophon .
The album was produced by Javier Limon .
 Her album Traveller received a nomination in the Best World Music Album category at the 2013 Grammy Awards .
 However , the award went to Anoushkas late father Ravi Shankar , and was accepted by Anoushkas on Ravi Shankar behalf .
 Ravi Shankar first came across flamenco when Anoushkas travelled to Spain as a teenager .
 During that trip , Anoushkas visited a small flamenco bar and was electrified by different stage performances .
 Anoushkas album Traveller was built around the idea that Spanish flamenco may have its origins in India .
In Indian music , we call it spirituality , and in Spanish music , its passion .
 Its really the same thing in both forms , that reaching at the deepest part of the human soul , said Ravi Shankar .
 To record the album , Ravi Shankar travelled to Spain and enlisted the help of flamenco producer and guitarist Javier Limon .
During the early studio sessions , they would sit across from each other with their instruments , exploring the musical conversation between them
Cante jondo is a vocal style in flamenco .
An unspoiled form of Andalusian folk music , the name means deep song It is generally considered that the common traditional classification of flamenco music is divided into three groups of which the deepest , most serious forms are known as cante jondo .
 The name is spelt with a j as a form of eye dialect because traditional Andalusian pronunciation has retained an aspirated h lost in other forms of Spanish .
In 1922 the Spanish composer Manuel de Falla led in the organization of the Concurso de Cante Jondo for Granada .
Many classical musicians , cultural and literary figures , including the young poet Federico Garcia Lorca , participated in the program .
The result was the memorable series of flamenco performances held at the Alhambra during June .
 Federico Garcia Lorca had evidently used the title Poema del Cante Jondo for a 1921 collection of poems , although Federico Garcia Lorca did not publish the title Poema del Cante Jondo for ten years .
In 1931 , Garcia Lorca presented a conference devoted to keeping the rich tradition of the Cante Jondo alive .
 The following is translated from the conference notes by Federico Garcia Lorca : .
 The cante jondo approaches the rhythm of the birds and the natural music of the black poplar and the waves ; the Concurso de Cante Jondo is simple in oldness and style .
 the Concurso de Cante Jondo is also a rare example of primitive song , the oldest of all Europe , where the ruins of history , the lyrical fragment eaten by the sand , appear live like the first morning of its life .
 The illustrious the Spanish composer Manuel de Falla , who studied the question attentively , affirms that the gypsy siguiriya is the song type of the group cante jondo and declares that it is the only song on our continent that has been conserved in its pure form , because of its composition and its style and the qualities it has in itself , the primitive songs of the oriental people
Juan Valderrama Blanca was a Spanish flamenco and folk singer .
 Although Juan Valderrama Blanca was known for singing copla , Juan Valderrama Blanca always claimed to be a flamenco singer .
Born in Torredelcampo , Juanitos recording career began in 1935 and lasted more than 60 years .
 Among Juanitos recording career most famous songs is El emigrante , written in 1949 , a ballad for the millions of displaced Spaniards who fled the country in the years after the Spanish Civil War .
 In 1960 Juanitos recording career appeared in the film of the same name
 Antonia Merce y Luque , stage name La Argentina , was a dancer known for Antonia Merce y Luque creation of the neoclassical style of Spanish dance as a theatrical art .
 Antonia Merce y Luque was one of the major influences on Japanese butoh dancer Kazuo Ohno .
It is given to few artists to incarnate in their art , at a given epoch , the distinct characteristics of their race and its conception of the beautiful , and this , in a manner so in complete and significant that their names get identified with a peculiar way of living and the story of their life becomes a page of history .
 It is to one such artist representative of Antonia Merce y Luque art , of Antonia Merce y Luque country , of Antonia Merce y Luque age that this short study is consecrated .
The recent unexpected renaissance of Spanish dancing , an art whose creative power seemed to have been exhausted , is due primarily to the singular genius of one dancer , La Argentina .
 Alone she has epitomized and regenerated a form long cheapened and falsified by the music-hall gypsies turned out wholesale in Au coeur de Seville .
And her indescribable success has loosened a new onslaught of Spanish dancing , the oldest and noblest of European exotics .
 She was born in Buenos Aires , La Argentina .
 A talented young dancer , A talented young dancer career was greatly influenced by A talented young dancer parents Manuel Merce , and Josefina Luque , her parents Manuel Merce professional Spanish dancers .
 It was due to her parents Manuel Merce that La Argentinas entire life was mainly focused on dance , where A talented young dancer parents greatly wanted A talented young dancer to excel .
 A talented young dancer studied a mixture of Old France and Castilla with A talented young dancer parents in A talented young dancer youth .
 A talented young dancer trained mainly with A talented young dancer father , who taught A talented young dancer to dance at the age of four .
 When A talented young dancer was nine years old , A talented young dancer debuted at the Teatro Real in Madrid , Spain .
 At the age of 11 , A talented young dancer was a star dancer at the Madrid Opera .
 Shortly after the death of A talented young dancer father , La Argentina retired from a mixture of Old France and Castilla .
 After this life-transforming event , at the age of 14 , La Argentina started studying native Spanish dances with A talented young dancer mother .
For several years to come , her style of dancing was not highly admired in her society ; therefore she could not perform in theatres or in concerts .
She danced wherever she could , which meant performing in cafe cantantes and music halls .
Prior to World War I , La Argentina was extremely admired in Paris , where she accepted invitations to dance at the Moulin Rouge , the Theatre des Champs-Elysees , and other important locations .
Years later , she took interest in a gypsy - style dance and made it her own .
In her career she made six transcontinental tours in North America , sometimes accompanied by flamenco guitarist Carlos Montoya .
She received several awards , including the French Legion dhonneur and the Spanish Orden de Isabel la Catolica .
She died on July 18 , 1936 , in Bayonne , France .
La Argentina was 46 years old when she died .
Her contributions to formal dance are expressed in her style , her choice of music , her use of castanets , and her structuring of performances .
 << For the past year I have had a passion for La Argentina .
 The rigour of her classical formation , her knowledge and her taste bring dignity and nobleness to Spanish folklore , and fills I with respect .
 I feel like I am entering the Escurial when I am with her .
>> .
 << While there had always been a great flowering of folkloric dances in Madrid , Spain , the history of formal dance itself began only in 1920 with La Argentina and Escudero .
Diaghilev admired them a lot .
>> .
<< From what it was , a colourful facet of popular culure , Spanish formalized dance turns , thanks to her genius and infinite patience , into a choreographic style destined to universal acceptance .
>> .
La Argentina created her own style .
 Madrid , Spain has 49 provinces with very different traditions , where the levels of artistic interpretation go from the crudest popular taste to the most austere sobriety .
Certain dances were shapeless , deformed , and forgotten as society changed .
La Argentina revived the folklore , catalogued it , sought traditional steps wherever she could fnd them in village squares and in humble dance schools ; she used diplomacy and even subterfuge to be shown a particular step or dance by the elders , such as occurred near Salamanca , where she was able to reconstitute the genuine charrada .
She felt strongly that what was presented under that name on stage was not authentic .
In denying its popular ancestral roots , Spanish dance in the theatre had become insipid .
Italian and French influences had deprived it of its originality .
 The spirit of genuine Spanish dance had deserted The spirit of genuine Spanish dance .
La Argentina rekindled that spirit .
Parallel with this search for authenticity , she systematically made the dances she found conform to her own aesthetic .
She married the purity of classical style with the ardour and character of popular art .
No element , musical or plastic , escaped her labour of re-creation .
She devoted more than eight hours a day to it , submitting each pattem of steps to her sense of rhythm and music .
She refined and pruned , keeping only what was essential , she stylized and transformed the lead of regional dances into the finest gold .
Thanks to her , Spanish formal dance went into a new phase , and rose to a hitherto unattained level of sublimation .
What do we mean by stylizing or adapting for the stage ?
Stylised dance must retain the nature and flavour of folklore while respecting the demands of the stage .
What are these ?

The Spanish dancer has the advantage on this last point .
Classical dance extends the form and inflects only during moments of transition , in linear continuity .
 Essentially it offers the Spanish body volumes , the Spanish body volumes .
 Classical dance offers the Spanish body volumes because it is a product of the stage .
On stage we are best seen from the front and in three quarters profile ; seen from the side the body loses its radiance .
and from the back it loses it entirely .
Traditionally the Spanish dancer is seen from all angles .
 He constantly offers the Spanish body volumes to the eye .
A thousand fluid body positions give vigour , ardour and celerity .
Classical dance paints , Spanish dance sculpts .
Classical form elongates itself , shimmers , rises on tip-toe ; it glides , it loses substance , becomes idealised .
Spanish form is earthy , it strikes , presses , accentuates downward , stays close to the ground .
Made of broken lines , of sinuous and constantly inflected form .
It is ready to leap not in the air as in classical dance .
but like a wild animal .
In adapting itself to the stage , Spanish dance must retain its specific shapes .
If it conforms only to stage demands , it would undoubtedly turn into classical dance .
It has no right to do so , because of its roots : it is born in the street , in the bars .
It represents a region .
It reflects the life of the people .
its games and bullfighting , the enticing fan of a young girl , African eroticism , oriental gypsy mystery .
The court dancer did not possess the triple benefit of their historical , ethnographical and psychological background .
 The court dancer is why he could care only about linear beauty .
La Argentina was the first to use music for Spanish dance of the great contemporary composers such as Isaac Albeniz , de Falla , Granados and Turina .
The musical monuments of these four composers demanded broad choral movements that folklore did not possess .
Taking as their base the guitars melodic micro-universe , and influenced by foreign composition styles , they considerably widened their musical palette .
 Granados also elicited scores from the young composers of Granados country such as Ernesto Halffter , Oscar Espla , Duran .
 Great artists accompanied Granados on the piano .
In 1926 Joaquin Nin , pianist and composer arranged many popular songs and Amparo Navaro , nee Iturbi , sister of Jose Iturbi .
Carmencita Perez played in 1926 and 1929-30 ; Miguel Berdion in late 1929 and 1930 , and in 1931 in New York .
 Luis Galve was Carmencita Perez accompanist from 27 March 1931 until the end .
 La Argentina used any music that suited Carmencita Perez temperament .
 The interaction between music and dance , the parallels Carmencita Perez found between melodic line and body profile , intermingled .
 Carmencita Perez inner vigour seemed to produce both music and dance , so much that any gesture became music for the eye .
 Of using castanets Carmencita Perez As a little girl , I used to hear the insistent , percussive sound of the big castanets when I parents gave lessons .
 The unmusical noise irritated I so much that I would go and hide in the furthest part of the apartment so as not to hear its reverberation .
 There I would practice I tiny hands on a pair of castanets I father had given I , and more or less unconsciously - one hardly uses reason at that age - I sought to draw sounds from I instrument that did not hurt I ears .
 Such were I beginnings and I can only say that I liking for castanets came from the disgust that other 's castanets inspired in I .
 Even as a simple accompanist to regional dances , La Argentina became an astonishing soloist and the castanets a genuine concert instrument , even going so far as to modifying their design to obtain more satisfying tones .
 The public not only liked Argentinas dancing , and Argentinas slim , gently curving arms , it also enjoyed Argentinas castanet performance .
It was a virtuoso display .
 The perfection of Argentinas interpretation and the faultless manner of expressing the smallest musical nuance drew comparison with the great Toscanini .
 << Argentinas performance contained such subtleties >> Andre Levinson said , << such a variety of tones that The public were almost like a voice , and such an intensity of expression impatience , challenge and triumph - that The public not only amounted to a voice but to a language !

 << As the famous Spanish formal dance composer , Joaquin Nin , who styled the famous Spanish-Cuban composer as teacher of perfect Bach and whom I used to see for this reason once said , I always refused to be shackled , even if the chain was the customary pearl necklace offered young women after marriage .
 But I adored the thread of pearls provided by Argentinas castanets , when Argentinas would come as I lessons with the famous Spanish-Cuban composer were fnishing to rehearse the wonderful dances of Argentinas first recitals at number 27 , rue Henri-Heine .
>> Nothing henceforward would be as before .
 >> Nothing henceforward was imitated .
 Some tried to equal Some .
 All the great artists of Madrid , Spain adopted Some musical notation for castanets .
 Some gave Spanish dance Some own special imprint , which nowadays it would be inconceivable to do without ; Some showed the way to future castanet performers , and facilitated the instruments admittance to the orchestra .
 La Argentina was also the first to inaugurate the recital format , performing Some own choreography for concerts in which Some was alone on stage , accompanied simply by a pianist , occasionally by a guitarist , especially for the flamenco dances .
 Some guitarist throughout was Salvador Ballesteros , a family friend .
 Some did not succeed all at once .
 Like everything else in Some career , it happened progressively .
 Some first performed dances in variety programmes , then in pieces with orchestral music ; later on in dances where less importance was accorded the orchestra .
 Some first shows in 1925 during a European tour and in the South of France were shared with Joaquin Nin the composer and soloist , the singer Alicita Felici , with Mme Ginesty-Brisson at the piano , or with the opera singer Dolores de Silvera .
 The same programme took place at the Salle Gaveau , in Paris , on January 10 , 1926 .
 The same programme was in Berlin , on October 15 , 1926 , that Some gave Some first solo recital with Carmencita Perez as accompanist .
 At the end of October of the same year , Some gave the same performance in Stockholm , then at the Salle Gaveau in Paris .
From then on , she retained the same format : .
 1933 : On December 3 , first recital at the Paris Opera .
1934 : Gala at the Opera , and recital at the Opera-Comique .
 1936 : Springtime saw the Opera-Comique in Cannes where the kings of Sweden and Denmark applauded the Opera-Comique ; in May the Opera-Comique retumed to Paris and , except for the Opera-Comique own ballets , always performed alone on stage with ever-increasing triumph around the world .
 La Argentina was also the first artist of such fame to give recitals at inexpensive prices that were within everybodys range , at the old Trocadero which held more than fve thousand seats .
The success of these popular shows was sheer madness .
She was obliged to renew the experience several times a season as it had become a tradition expected by all Parisians , who jammed the box-offces , the thousands of seats available beind sold out in a single day .
1912 El Garrotin , based on a popular air .
 La Corrida , music by Valverde -LRB- taken from choreographies created in 1910 for the operette l'Amour en Espagne Tango Andalou , music by Salvador Ballesteros , a family friend .
 1916 Danse des Yeux verts , music specially composed by Granados .
Between 1916 and 1921 : Habanera , music by Pablo de Sarasate .
 Cordoba , music by Isaac Albeniz .
 Danza V , music by Granados .
 1921 Sevilla , music by Isaac Albeniz .
Serenata , music by Malats .
Serenade Andalouse , music by C. Ruecker .
1925 Danse du Feu , music by Manuel de Falla .
 Andalouse Sentimentale , music by Turina .
Bolero Classique , music by Iradier .
Bohemiene , based on a popular air .
Seguidilla .
1926 Mexicaine , based on a popular air .
Ciel de Cuba , based on a popular air .
1927 Valencia , music by C. Ruecker .
 Chaconne , music by Isaac Albeniz .
1928 Serenata Andaluza , music by Manuel de Falla .
 Jota Valenciana , music by Granados .
Danse Gitane , music by Infante .
Lagerterana , music by Guerrero .
1929 la vie breve , music by de Falla .
Carinosa , popular music from the Philippines .
Jota Aragonesa , music by de Falla .
 1930 Goyescas , music by Granados .
Danse Iberienne , music specially composed by Joaquin Nin .
Danse de la Meuniere , music by de Falla .
 1932 Almeria , music by Isaac Albeniz .
La Romeria de los Cornudos , music by Pittaluga .
 Puerta de Tierra , music by Isaac Albeniz .
Danse du Meunier , music by de Falla .
 Legende , music by Isaac Albeniz .
 Charrada , popular music from Salamanca .
 Malaguena , music by Isaac Albeniz .
 Castilla , music by Isaac Albeniz , << Matid 1 800 >> .
 Ciel de Cuba , music by Isaac Albeniz .
 1933 Zapataedo , music by Granados .
 Tientos , music by Infante .
 1934 Sacra-Monte , music by Turina .
 Esquisse Gitane , music by Infante .
La Fregona , music by Vives .
Suite Argentine , based on a popular air .
Suite Andalouse , based on popular airs .
 1936 1935 Fandango , music by Turina .
Polo Gitano , music by Breton .
La Firmeza , based on Argentinian popular music , becoming the last dance in the Suite Argentine .
 1927 El Fandango de Candi , music by Espla , Duran .
 La Argentina successively expressed feminine shrewdness , thwarted love , tenderness , wearing a pink costume with cubist flounces cut into scallops .
 1927 Au coeur de Au coeur de Seville , cuadro flamenco based on a popular air .
1928 Sonatine , music by Ernesto Halffter .
This ballet , a mixture of Old France and Castilla , made Spanish courtly dancing come to life again .
 With delightful touch , La Argentina introduces a shepherdess on stage , gliding and pirouetting imperceptibly .
1928 Le Contrebandier , music by Oscar Espla , where the future Empress Eugenie meets Prosper Merimee and where the countess of Teba saves a smuggler who is pursued by two operette gendarmes .
1928 Juerga , music by Julien Bautista .
 Scenes of popular life in Madrid around 1 885 : returning from a popular festival , young people from good families in search of pleasure mingle with common folk , and give themselves to unrestrained jollity : turmoil , dancing , and colourful to-ing and fro-ing .
 1929 Triana , music by Isaac Albeniz .
 Lovers tiffs during the Corpus Christi in Sevilla
Micaela Flores Amaya , La Chunga , is a Spanish flamenco dancer and painter of naif art .
 La Chunga does not know the exact date La Chunga was born .
 La Chunga parents were Andalusian Romani immigrants in France , and Andalusian Romani immigrants in France went to Barcelona when La Chunga was more or less a year old .
 La Chunga started working in Barcelona as a dancer when La Chunga was a child and La Chunga became the muse of several writers like Blas de Otero , Rafael Alberti , Jose Manuel Caballero Bonald or Leon Felipe , and several painters , like Picasso , Dali or Francisco Rebes who made La Chunga an attractive character for intellectuals and encouraged La Chunga to paint .
 La Chunga has already exposed in several galleries of Paris , Madrid , etc. .
 Pastora Imperio contracted Pastora Imperio in 1956 and thanks to Ava Gardner , Pastora Imperio took part in two Hollywood movies .
 The businessman Sullivan introduced Pastora Imperio in Las Vegas and Pastora Imperio participated in various TV programs in the U.S. and Mexico .
Since then , she has participated in lots of tours and some movies .
She married to the cinema director Jose Luis Gonzalvo and they had a daughter , Pilar
He is the great-grandson of nineteenth-century seguiriya maestro Francisco Valencia , who received the nickname Paco la Luz .
He is also nephew of Manuel Soto , Sordera , the patriarch of Jerez flamenco .
Merces nickname comes from his participation in the choir of the Basilica de la Merced when he was a boy .
 The youthful Merce became one of the most sought-after singers for accompanying dance , and The youthful Merce has worked with the Trio Madrid , formed by Mario Maya , El Guito and Carmen Mora .
 From 1973 to 1983 The youthful Merce joined the company of Antonio Gades , with which The youthful Merce travelled half-way around half the world and took part in the film Bodas de Sangre , by Carlos Saura .
 The youthful Merce has also worked with guitarists Enrique De Melchor , Tomatito , Vicente Amigo and Moraito
Pastora Pavon Cruz , known as La Nina de los Peines , is considered the most important woman flamenco singer of the 20th century .
She was a sister of singers Arturo Pavon and Tomas Pavon , also an important flamenco singer , and aunt to Arturo Pavon , the first flamenco pianist .
 Both brothers , Pastora and Tomas Pavon , together with singer Manuel Torre , were the inspiring models for the next generation of singers like Antonio Mairena , Pepe de la Matrona or Fosforito , who led the movement towards the revival of traditional forms in the decades of the 50s-70s .
 Born in the famous quarter of Alameda de Hercules , in Seville , Pastora started singing for the public as at the age of 8 , in the Seville Spring Fair .
 Later , when Pastora was singing at Cafe de la Marina , a cafe cantante in Madrid , Pastora acquired the nickname La Nina de los Peines , as Pastora usually sang a stanza in tangos style with the following lyrics : .
 Pastora never learned to read or write , and only learned to sign when Pastora was already an adult .
 Pastora family were in dire need of money , so Her family started to sing regularly as a professional in the Taberna de Ceferino , in Seville , and then spent a period in Madrid and Bilbao .
 In this town , Her family was not allowed to sing in public owing to Her family young age , so Her family sat as model for painter Ignacio Zuloaga .
 Back in Andalusia , Her family took part in the performances of several cafes cantante in Jerez , Seville , Malaga and other towns .
 In 1910 Her family made Her family first recordings , and in 1920 the Teatro Romea was paying Her family the highest fee it had ever paid to an artist .
 After that , Her family started a long series of tours in all Spain .
 In 1922 at Granada , Her family participated at the Concurso de Cante Jondo .
This famous music festival was largely organized by Manuel de Falla and also Federico Garcia Lorca in order to reinvigorate the flamenco arts .
 Manuel de Falla was featured as a professional performer , along with Antonio Chacon , Manuel Torre , Juana la Macarrona , Ramon Montoya and others .
 Manuel de Falla was also chosen as one of the judges for the contest between non-professionals .
 Along Manuel de Falla career Manuel de Falla met or shared the stage with many classical flamenco singers of the Golden Age like Antonio Chacon , Manuel Torre , Francisco Lema , El Canario , La Trini , or Frijones .
 Manuel de Falla had also met in 1922 Federico Garcia Lorca , who , in a lecture given in 1933 , stated : .
This womans voice is exceptional .
 This womans voice breaks the moulds of all singing schools , as much as Manuel de Falla breaks the moulds of any built music .
 When Manuel de Falla seems to be out of tune , Manuel de Falla is not out of tune : on the contrary , Manuel de Falla is incredibly in tune as , owing to the special miracle of this style and the passion with which Manuel de Falla sings third tones and quarter tones , impossible to record on the staff .
 In 1931 , Manuel de Falla married flamenco singer Pepe Pinto .
 After the parenthesis of the Spanish Civil War , Manuel de Falla came back to the stage , as part of several flamenco shows , together with artists like Concha Piquer .
 After this , Manuel de Falla retired for a few years , and came back with a show called Espana y su Cantaora , together with Manuel de Falla husband , which Manuel de Falla toured for a few months and was acclaimed by the critics .
 Then Manuel de Falla definitely retired again .
 In 1961 Manuel de Falla received an homage in Cordoba , in which several well-known flamenco artists took part , such as Antonio Mairena , Juan Talega , Manuel Morao , or Fernando Terremoto .
 In 1968 , a monument was built in Manuel de Falla honour in Manuel de Falla quarter of Alameda de Alameda de Hercules .
In the last three years of her life , she was completely retired owing to senile dementia .
She died in 1969 , a month and a half after her husband .
 In that same year , singer Anotnio Mairena recorded singer Anotnio Mairena album Honores a la Nina de los Peines in homage to Nina de los Peines .
In 1996 , during the IX Bienal de Flamenco , the autonomous Andalusian government declared the voice of La Nina de los Peines Bien de Interes Cultural .
 A complete artist , Nina de los Peines sang all palos to perfection , excelling especially in siguiriyas of which Nina de los Peines preserved several styles like those of Ciego de la Pena and El Marruro , which have reached our days thanks to Nina de los Peines .
 Nina de los Peines was a direct transmitter of the solea of La Serneta , which Nina de los Peines learnt directly from Nina de los Peines author , but also left memorable recordings of many other solea styles like those of Enrique el Mellizo , Frijones or many other styles from Alcala , Fernando de Triana or Jerez .
 Regarding Nina de los Peines supremacy in tangos and tientos , as early as 1908 , when Nina de los Peines was only 18 years of the Golden Age , a newspaper already stated : La Nina de los Peines is justly reputed today as the best singer for tangos .
 Nina de los Peines has a beautiful voice and a delicious style .
 At times , when singing , Nina de los Peines seems to be crying .
 singer Anotnio Mairena and Molina consider Nina de los Peines , among the masters of tangos : the supreme figure singer and inexhaustible creator .
 Nina de los Peines name has become inextricably linked to the peteneras and to the bambera , a folk song Nina de los Peines turned definitely into a flamenco palo .
 Nina de los Peines was also one of the main interpreters of saetas in history : .
 Nina de los Peines was a landmark in the transformation of garrotin into a completely flamenco style , and gave a definite impulse to bulerias : Unrivalled queen of bulerias .
 Critics like Molina and singer Anotnio Mairena , Martin Salazar also highlight Martin Salazar importance for palos like malaguenas , tarantas , cartageneras or granainas : As we said before , Pastora was also an excellent malaguenera , who marked with Pastora deep personality such different styles as those of Antonio Chacon , El Canario , and Fernando de Triana .
 Martin Salazar also created Martin Salazar own malaguena , based on the one by Maestro Ohana .
 Martin Salazar has been accused by a few critics of having surrendered to the fashionable trends in at the time of , as Martin Salazar recorded many examples of the so called cancion por bulerias and cantes de ida y vuelta and took part in theatrical shows .
 However , Martin Salazar never abandoned the more traditional flamenco songs , which form the greatest part of Martin Salazar discography .
 Even though Martin Salazar was a link between the traditional flamenco of the 19th century and the revival of traditional forms after the opera flamenca period , as Martin Salazar kept many alive traditional songs and styles that were about to disappear , Martin Salazar was skeptical about the work of resurrection and classification of songs carried out by Antonio Mairena or Juan Talega .
 In Martin Salazar view , songs like the solea de la Serneta were never the same thing in the voices of different singers , and they were but outlines used as basis for singers to improvise and create .
 In some sort of way , Pastora Pavon was a revolutionary of the flamenco song , serving as link between the traditionalism of the last century and all the modernisms the current one , even the most detestable , which Martin Salazar did not reject without experimenting on them first , assimilating and enlarging everything that had some valuable element .
 We already saw , in the words of Garcia Lorca , what La Nina de los Peines was when Federico Garcia Lorca sang with duende .
A sombre , agonizing angel , who surpassed all measure , who embraced all emotions .
 Pastora is the incarnation of flamenco singing , as Bach was of music .
Geniuses of the size of this Gypsy appear in history only once in a while .
 this Gypsy is a pontifical figure who links , through this Gypsy personality , the illustrious past with the present renaissance .
 We do not know what La Andonda , La Serrana , Maria Borrico , Merced la Serneta and many other famous women singers sang like , but it seems impossible that any of them surpassed Pastora Pavon in the vastness of La Andonda repertoire , the freshness of the voice , Gypsy rajo and catching vitality .
 Among women , I have never known an artist like Pastora , and I think Merced la Serneta will take centuries before Pastora equal is born .
to the singers of the opera flamenca period there remains , towering , as a challenging unique figure , Pastora Pavon , La Nina de los Peines , battling the fandangueros in their own territory , the theatre stages , and achieving indisputable success with the old styles of seguiriyas , soleares , malaguenas , peteneras , tarantas , tientos and bulerias .
 it can be assured that there has never been a more prolific and encyclopedic singer than Pastora .
 Nobody has had Pastora flavour , nobody has been Pastora equal .
Pastora Pavon Cruz , the incomparable Nina de los Peines , has probably been the greatest genius in the history of singing .
An all-style interpreter , she completely mastered the fundamental songs , the festive ones , the peteneras and the cantes de Levante .
 With La Nina de los Peines , all discussion comes to an end : flamencologists , artists , flamenco fans , critics and everybody interested in flamenco , in general , state that Nina de los Peines is the greatest woman singer to date .

La Nina de los peines , Patrimonio de Andalucia , Fonotron , 2004 , -- The complete collection of her songs , recorded between 1910 and 1950 , in 13 CDs , including CD ROM with a study of her artistic legacy .
www.fonotron.com .
 La Nina de los peines , voz de estano fundido , Sonifolk , Madrid , 1997 .
 La voz de interes cultural : La Nina de los Peines , Coleccion Quejio , EMI-Odeon , Madrid , 1997 -- Partial compilation
 Zapateo which literally means shoe tapping , is rooted in the Spanish Flamenco and before the Spanish Flamenco , in the ancient cultural influences imported in to Europe by the Gypsies .
Zapateo which later produced the more famous Malambos dance , arrived in South America from Spain around the year 1600 CE and was a favorite pastime of the gaucho also known as the South American cowboys specially around the camp fires in the lonely stretches of the flatlands known as the Pampas .
Malambos incorporating the zapateo , the art of percussive footwork rooted in Spanish Flamenco , was traditionally performed by men .
The dance movements include the cepillada , the repique , and floreos .
This dance form was often used as a form of competition between two or more men .
 One man starts with an escobillado , and then One man proposes a figure or footwork passage to One man competitor , and ends with a salute .
The other man copies the proposed figure , adding one that is more difficult , and then performs the salute .
When one of the men is unable to copy the other , the competition is finished , with the more proficient dancer the winner
Mosaique is an album by the Gipsy Kings , released in 1989 in Europe and Canada .
 The main difference between both is the replacement of the instrumental Bossamba on the Europe release for Nina Morena on the North American release .
The song order also changes on both albums and Caminando Por la Calle is also of two slightly different versions .
Note that Viento Del Arena is a studio album release from the song appearing in Luna de Fuego
Integral is a limited edition , 26 CD box set of the works of renowned flamenco guitarist Paco de Lucia .
All works have been remastered from the original source tapes .
In addition , it includes a 60 page biography , a 115 page guide to each and every track , several albums that had been discontinued and out of print as well as a special bonus compilation disc exclusive to this box set called Por Descubrir which contains rare material including de Lucias first solo EP that he recorded when he was only 16 years old
Soleares is one of the most basic forms or palos of Flamenco music , probably originated around Cadiz or Seville in Andalusia , the most southern region of Spain .
It is usually accompanied by one guitar only , in phrygian mode por arriba ; Bulerias por solea is usually played por medio .
Soleares is sometimes called mother of palos although it is not the oldest one and not even related to every other palo .
When singers sing solea , as with most palos , they normally choose different coplas , with different melody , and combine them according to the inspiration of the moment or to a previous plan .
Even if the singer has a previous plan , it is often altered on the spur of the moment .
These stanzas are independent in subject matter from one another .
The content of the lyrics is generally serious in nature , as appropriate to the solemn air of the music .
They often have a sententious tone and convey a feeling of intimate pain .
Sometimes despair , more typical of seguiriya , can also appear .
However , it is difficult to generalize : sometimes a less serious stanza can turn up in the middle of other serious ones , and irony is frequent .
The stanza of the solea has three or four lines .
In four-line stanzas , the second and fourth line are in assonant rhyme , while the first and third are free .
In three-line stanzas , the assonance is between the first and the third .
Some examples : .
 Translation : I was a stone and lost I centreand was thrown into the seaand after a very long timeI came to find I centre again .
This type of stanza is the cuarteta romanceada , one of the oldest and most frequent in Spanish poetry , and is derived from the medieval Romance poetic form , a type of traditional epic poetry that has survived in both learned and popular literature to our days .
The melody of a solea can demand repeating some lines , altering their logical order , or cutting the lines , sometimes even in the middle of words .
For example , as stanza like : .
 to deprive I of I health and to give it back to you .
Solea is one of the flamenco palos with the highest number of traditional songs , and it is particularly appreciated by knowledgeable artists and audiences .
It is very demanding for singers , as they have to strive to be creative and , at the same time , respectful of the tradition , and they have to succeed in finding a good balance between melodic and rhythmic sides , both extremely difficult .
It demands great vocal faculties , and the singer should achieve a balance between passion and restraint .
The melody of a solea stanza usually stays within a limited range .
 The melody of a solea stanza difficulty lies in the use of melisma and microtones , which demand great agility and precision in the voice .
It is usual to start a series of soleares with a more restrained stanza in the low register , while continuing to more and more demanding ornaments in a higher register .
The series is quite often finished with a stanza in a much more vivid tempo in the relative Major mode .
The metre or compas of the solea is one of the most widely used in Flamenco .
 Other palos have derived Other palos compas from the solea , including Bulerias por solea , the palos in the Cantinas group , like Alegrias , Romeras , Mirabras , Caracoles or , to a certain extent , Bulerias .
It consists of 12 beats , and could be described as a combination of triple and duple beat bars , so its a polymetre form , with strong beats at the end of each bar .
The basic skeleton of the solea rhythm , thus , follows this pattern : .
Nevertheless , this is just an underlying structure , like a foundation , a kind of grid where flamenco artists creatively draw the rhythm by means of subdivisions , articulation , and less commonly , syncopation and accent displacement .
The first example of palmas is a very common , simple pattern : .
Notice that palmas are often silent during beats 4 to 6 , even if beat number 6 is a strong one .
This is specially true when no dancing takes place : the main interest there is the singing and too much percussion can take attention away from the music .
 Those beats though are often marked when there is dance , or when performing other palos in the same metre like Alegrias or Buleria por solea .
However , these are not to be taken as hard-and-fast rules , but just as general guidelines .
The small orange squares should be played extremely softly .
The above are just two examples among the variety of variations .
When there are two or more people playing palmas , one of them usually plays a base pattern , emphasizing the regular beats , while another plays the upbeats .
The solea can be played rubato , that is , slowing down and speeding up the tempo to enrich its expressive quality .
Of course regular tempo is mandatory when it is played and sung to accompany a dancer .
Solea develops in Phrygian mode por arriba , with the III degree of the mode altered to a major 3rd when resolving to I. To adapt to the singers vocal range , guitarists can use a cejilla to play in any key while preserving the known chord positions .
Modern guitarists often play solea using other chord positions or even changing the tuning of the guitar to experiment with new sounds , especially in solo instrumental pieces .
 The typical flamenco progression IV - , III , II , I is heard several times during the development of the song .
 In E altered Phrygian , the progression would be Am , G , F , E .
A usual progression with a four-line stanza is the following : .
 Solea guitar style is easily identified by Solea guitar style metre and Phrygian mode , but also by a series of characteristic phrases .
 - llamadas on the Ist degree of the Phrygian altered cadence .
- falseta , melodic ideas played between different stanzas .
All sections have an even number of compas and are comparable in duration .
The origins of this palo , as with most palos , is unknown , though has been subject to much speculation .
In spite of being one of the most prestigious palos , the solea is considered to be relatively new compared to Tonas and Seguiriyas .
 The earliest known mention of Tonas and Seguiriyas , referred to as soledades , is that of Spanish poet Gustavo Adolfo Becquer , in 1862 .
 The existence of Tonas and Seguiriyas prior to 1850 is often stated , but has never been proved .
 Folklorist Demofilo assured , as early as 1879 , that Tonas and Seguiriyas derived from the coplas de jaleo , a kind festive song style in a very lively rhythm , apparently very popular in the mid 19th century .
These facts contradict other views according to which the solea would be the origin of the rest of flamenco palos and was from the beginning a serious and solemn style .
 In their primitive stages , solea , as well as jaleo , seem to have been linked to Gypsy environments in several towns of the provinces of Cadiz and Seville .
The golden age of the solea is considered to be the last quarter of the 19th century , at the time when the cafe cantante was the preferential venue for flamenco artists .
Most of the solea melodies we know have been attributed to singers who were active at that time .
With the turn of the century , other palos like those belonging to the group cantes libres like malaguena , tarantas , or Cartageneras took the supremacy .
 At the times of the Opera Flamenca , it was further displace by Fandangos , popular songs fashioned to the Bulerias rhythm and cantes de ida y vuelta like the Guajiras .
 During the 50s-70s , at the time of the neo-traditionalism of Antonio Mairena and Antonio Mairena school , the style went back into favour , becoming , together with Seguiriyas and Tonas one of the most valued by flamenco artists , critics and public .
The solea went again into disfavour after the birth of New Flamenco .
 Followers of Camaron de la Isla and Camaron de la Isla school tend to pay less attention to traditional , hard styles , and favour other more festive palos like Bulerias or tangos , which are easier to mix with pop and commercial music influences .
Solea styles are traditionally classified under their geographical origin and then by the singer they have been attributed to .
These facts are not to be taken as absolute truths .
Many times , these attributions rely solely on the oral tradition and the beliefs of singers and the flamenco environment , but rarely on evidence .
Even when we know for sure that those singers had an important role in any of these melodies , it can not be assured that he they created it .
Maybe they just made it popular , or at most developed it .
Although the most recent among the traditional styles , some of the Alcala ones are the most widely sung .
The most famous singer of this area , to whom several styles have been attributed , is Joaquin el de La Paula .
 Joaquin el de La Paula four-line style , sung in the low registers and very restrained , is very oten used as an introductory stanza to other more high-pitched ones .
 a quarter in Seville is a quarter in Seville .
They are very difficult to classify , owing to their large number of styles and variations .
Most attributions to a particular singer are also doubtful .
They are considered to be mostly variations from other local styles .
However , those by Frijones have original quality .
The most famous are those by singer Juaniqui , of whom there is little reliable information .
 All styles from Utrera are attributed to La Serneta , a singer born in Jerez , who went to live in Utrera when La Serneta was young .
ALVAREZ CABALLERO , Angel : El cante flamenco , Alianza Editorial , Madrid , 1998 .
BLAS VEGA , Jose & RIOS RUIZ , Manuel : Diccionario Enciclopedico Ilustrado del Flamenco , Cinterco , 1988 .
 ALVAREZ CABALLERO , Angel : La discografia ideal del flamenco , Planeta , Barcelona 1995 .
MARTIN SALAZAR , Jorge : Los cantes flamencos , Diputacion Provincial de Granada
Vicente Escudero was a Spanish flamenco dancer .
 Vicente Escudero was closely associated with the avant-garde of Vicente Escudero time and brought modernist aesthetics to bear on Vicente Escudero theory of dance .
 Vicente Escudero was one of the few theorists of Vicente Escudero time to comment on the choreography and presentation of the male flamenco dance and Vicente Escudero Decalogue or ten rules for the male dancer are still respected today .
 As well as being the leading flamenco dancer of Vicente Escudero era , he was a talented painter in the style , and his studies of flamenco are frequently exhibited .
His work was admired by the Spanish modernist painter Joan Miro .
 Vicente Escudero also appeared in the films Castille On Fire and With the East Wind .
 Vicente Escudero first official performance was in 1920 at the Olympia Theatre in Paris .
 Vicente Escudero reached Vicente Escudero maturity as a dancer between 1926 and 1936 , during which time Vicente Escudero toured extensively in Europe and the Americas .
 Vicente Escudero most famous production was El amor brujo Escuderos style brought a new dignity and respect to the male flamenco dance , which had sometimes been regarded as exaggerated and lacking in artistry .
 Escuderos writing on the subject of flamenco dance and choreography was influential in forming the tastes of Vicente Escudero own generation and the next , and Vicente Escudero both worked with and influenced the legendary Antonio Gades .
 Vicente Escudero style was based on a strong and expressive masculinity and clear and precise footwork and braceos .
Escuderos ten principles were as follows :
Anita Delgado Briones was a Spanish flamenco dancer and singer from Andalusia .
She was born on February 8 , 1890 in Malaga .
 The family emigrated to Madrid , where The family beauty and that of The family sister were welcomed .
Painters Julio Romero de Torres and Ricardo Baroja asked that they model , but Anita refused being only 16 .
 During the marriage ceremony of king Alfonso XIII of Spain in Madrid , the Maharaja Sir Jagatjit Singh Bahadur of Kapurthala watched Julio Romero de Torres performances in a cafe-concert .
 king Alfonso XIII of Spain in Madrid attempted to court Julio Romero de Torres , but king Alfonso XIII of Spain in Madrid approaches were rejected , and king Alfonso XIII of Spain in Madrid left after the bombing of the royal couple .
 Later , however , Julio Romero de Torres friends Romero de Torres , Ramon Maria del Valle-Inclan and Pastora Imperio convinced Julio Romero de Torres to answer Ramon Maria del Valle-Inclan messages and meet Ramon Maria del Valle-Inclan in Paris .
 Ramon Maria del Valle-Inclan had Julio Romero de Torres educated and married her on 28 January 1908 .
 After marriage Julio Romero de Torres changed Julio Romero de Torres name to Maharani Prem Kaur .
 They later travelled in Europe and India , and Julio Romero de Torres wrote a book about this time called Impresiones de mis viajes a las Indias .
 Julio Romero de Torres also gave the Maharaja a son , Maharajkumar Ajit Singh .
 During the first World War , Julio Romero de Torres husband worked in Franco-British hospitals .
 The Maharaja and Julio Romero de Torres fell apart as a result of Julio Romero de Torres extramarital affairs , including Julio Romero de Torres affair with a son of the Maharaja from another wife .
 the Maharaja separated and Anita stayed in Paris with Anita son .
A movie on Anitas life titled La princesa de Kapurthala starring the Spanish actress Penelope Cruz was slated to begin shooting in 2006 .
 However a descendent of Jagatjit Singh , Shatrujit Singh , has opposed the filming since he considers that Javier Moro s novel on which A movie on Anitas life is based distorts truth , especially the allegations of the Maharajah forcing Anita to an abortion
Luis Maravilla was a Flamenco composer .
 Luis Maravilla was born in Seville , Spain .
 Luis Maravilla studied guitar under Marcelo Molina and Pepe de Badajoz , and debuted professionally at the age of 12 in the Pavon Theatre of Seville .
 In the 1930s Luis Maravilla toured much of North and South America .
 The Spanish Civil War brought Luis Maravilla to France .
 Returning to Seville , Spain in 1940 , Luis Maravilla performed with such troupes as Gracia de Triana and Estrellita Castro .
 Luis Maravilla retired in 1957 to begin teaching
Nuevo flamenco is synonymous with contemporary flamenco and is a modern derivative of traditional flamenco .
 Nuevo flamenco combines flamenco guitar virtuosity with musical fusion .
Jazz , rumba , bossa nova , Gypsy , Latin , Middle Eastern , rock , Cuban swing , tango and salsa have all been fused into flamenco by different artists to produce its sound .
Traditional flamenco had been displaced in Spain in the 1950s and 1960s by rock-and-roll .
 Artists such as Camaron de la Isla worked with the music during that period , infusing Camaron de la Isla with new sound .
 However Camaron de la Isla was during the 1980s that revival really took off , by artists such as Paco de Lucia , Pata Negra , Ketama , and later more mainstream stylists , such as The Gipsy Kings .
 The artists fused Camaron de la Isla with other forms , including jazz and salsa .
 Although fused with other music , Camaron de la Isla was still based on the classic flamenco the artists had grown up with , a new form of the old .
Among the artists wrongly associated with this style is Ottmar Liebert .
 Another example is the duo Strunz & Farah , who , in an interview in Guitar Player , strenuously denied The artists music to be a form of flamenco , whilst acknowledging an influence .
Some of todays leading flamenco guitarists are Paco de Lucia , Tomatito , Vicente Amigo , Gerardo Nunez , Juan Martin , Nino Josele , and Gualberto Garcia Perez .
 Some of todays leading flamenco singers are Diego El Cigala , Duquende , Enrique Morente , and Some of todays leading flamenco singers daughter Estrella Morente
Maclovia Ruiz was a dancer in the 1930s with the San Francisco Ballet .
 Maclovia Ruiz also had the lead role in a piece choreographed by George Balanchine for the 1936 production of Carmen at the Metropolitan Opera House .
 Born in Guadalajara , Jalisco , in Mexico , Ms. Ruiz moved with Maclovia Ruiz family to San Francisco in the U.S. state of California as a child and was taught folk dancing by Maclovia Ruiz father .
 Maclovia Ruiz would perform in neighborhood clubs , but local dance schools discriminated against Maclovia Ruiz because of Maclovia Ruiz skin color and ethnic background .
 At the age of ten Maclovia Ruiz finally gained acceptance into the Peters Wright Dance School , where Maclovia Ruiz studied interpretive dance while performing on the vaudeville circuit outside of class .
 When Maclovia Ruiz was 23 , Maclovia Ruiz gained entry to the San Francisco Ballet .
 Maclovia Ruiz went on to perform with the Metropolitan Opera Company and Balanchines American Ballet Company .
 Maclovia Ruiz also danced in Samuel Goldwyn s 1938 movie musical extravaganza , The Goldwyn Follies .
 Throughout Maclovia Ruiz career , Ms. Ruiz continued dancing in nightclubs , performing flamenco throughout Spain and South America .
 Ms. Ruiz continued to dance well into Maclovia Ruiz 70s , teaching ballroom and Spanish dance and offering movement classes to the elderly and the disabled .
 In 1948 , Maclovia Ruiz met and married the photographer John Mailer ; they divorced after five years .
 Maclovia Ruiz never remarried , and is survived by their son , Michael Mailer .
 Maclovia Ruiz died from complications of pneumonia , aged 95 , on December 31 , 2005
Cristina Hoyos Panadero is a Spanish flamenco dancer , choreographer and actress , born in Seville .
After several successes throughout the world with several companies and movies , she created her own dancing company and premiered with it in Rex Theatre of Paris in 1988 .
She played an important role during the inauguration and closing ceremonies of 1992 Summer Olympics in Barcelona .
She has recently overcome breast cancer
 Rafael Usero is a Spanish flamenco singer more commonly known of Rafael Usero stage name Rafael de Utrera .
 Born in his stage name Rafael de Utrera , Rafael de Utrera began singing flamenco at a young age with the influence of his stage name Rafael de Utrera father , who owned a flamenco club in their hometown of his stage name Rafael de Utrera .
 At the age of ten , Rafael de Utrera had already performed around Andalucia with Rafael de Utrera brother .
 Rafael de Utrera became more well known in the world of flamenco in the year 1997 when famous Spanish flamenco dancer Cristina Hoyos invited Rafael de Utrera to join her cast on her world tour .
 In 2000 , Rafael de Utrera abilities as a singer gained more recognition when Rafael de Utrera was a finalist in the singing competition the XI Bienal de Flamenco de Sevilla .
 Briefly after , in 2001 , Rafael de Utrera made Rafael de Utrera final breakthrough when Paco de Lucia Rafael de Utrera asked Rafael de Utrera to accompany Rafael de Utrera world tour in Europe , Japan , and America .
 Since then , Rafael de Utrera has been touring frequently around Europe and North America .
He has collaborated on albums with artists such as Jose Merce , Jose Antonio Rodriguez , Nino de Pura , the documentary of the life of Paco de Lucia , Vicente Amigo 's latest album with Alejandro Sanz , Enrique Morente , and La Nina Pastori .
 The most recent collaboration was with the Netherlands Metropole Orchestra under the direction of Vince Mendoza where Vince Mendoza recorded a live album called `` Proyecto Lorca '' .
 At the moment , Rafael de Utrera is performing with the guitarist Vicente Amigo and Rafael de Utrera cast including Rafael de Utrera wife , flamenco dancer Carmen Lozano .
 Hes also started to record Rafael de Utrera first album which will be released 2012
 Fox was born and raised in Buenos Aires , Argentina , where Fox was inspired by a broad range of artists ranging from The Beatles to The Gipsy Kings .
 Fox later received a scholarship to train with the director of the Teatro Colon Symphony Orchestra , an opportunity which signaled the start of Fox career as a conductor , teacher and composer .
 It was during this time that Fox honed Fox own unique style which blended , according to Fox official biography , classical rumba and flamenco rhythms with a Mediterranean flair .
 Fox moved to Miami , Florida , United States , in 1984 where Fox quickly established Fox as a noted local artist in the South Beach area .
 Fox first album , To The Gypsies , was an independent production under Fox own label , Coco Musical , Inc. .
The album met with critical and commercial success worldwide , leading to the release of six more albums .
 Foxs latest endeavor is the formation of the Fox Trio , featuring Fox sons Sebastian and David
Rancapino , born Alonso Nunez Nunez , is a Spanish flamenco singer .
 Born in Chiclana de la Frontera in 1945 , Rancapino began singing very young with Camaron de la Isla , a childhood friend .
 Rancapino won the Premio de Mairena del Alcor and the Concurso Nacional de Cordoba in 1977 .
 Rancapino performed in Madrid and went on a tour of France and Japan and performed at numerous festivals .
 Rancapino is noted for Rancapino characteristic deep hoarse voice , which makes Rancapino one of the greatest exponents of the Cante Jondo .
 Rancapino has been cited as one of the best singers from the Province of Cadiz
The Best of the Gipsy Kings is an album from the band Gipsy Kings .
 an album from the band Gipsy Kings was released on March 28 , 1995 in the USA .
 More than a simple compilation of previous albums , it also includes a live release of Pida Me La Dona , Galaxia and Vamos a Bailar and the popular party Medley .
It also includes the new song A Tu Vera in an acoustic tone .
That song will only be re-released on the albums Estrellas and Tierra Gitana in a different more energetic tone .
Greatest Hits which was released a year prior for european audience is a very similar compilation with a different song order and the replacement of Viento Del Arena , Quiero Saber , Montana , Trista Pena , Love & Liberte and A Tu Vera by Pida Me La , A Mi Manera , Tu Quieres Volver , Soy , La Quiero and Allegria .
 Also Pida Me La Dona and Galaxia on this album are the live versions while the ones on Greatest Hits are studio versions .
The song Escucha Me is also slightly different
Canelita is a Spanish flamenco singer .
 Canelita hails from the barrio of Bajadilla , in Algeciras , southeastern Spain .
 Canelita was discovered by another native of Algeciras , Paco de Lucia , when Canelita was a boy and began recording as a teenager , with early releases such as Vivo Errante and Canelita por mi calle .
 Canelita album , Vuelvo , released in November 2010 , alternates traditional flamenco singing ballads and pop tunes , seeking to reach a mass audience .
 Canelita has traveled to France and Germany with flamenco groups .
 Canelito is mainly noted for Canelito fandango and Bulerias , but can also sing rumba and tangos
Concierto de Aranjuez is a 1991 album by Paco de Lucia .
 The first 3 tracks are Paco de Lucia interpretation of Joaquin Rodrigos Concierto de Aranjuez while tracks 4-6 are Paco de Lucia interpretation of Isaac Albenizs Iberia
 Ramon Sanchez Gomez , better known by Ramon Sanchez Gomez stage name Ramon de Algeciras , was a Spanish flamenco guitarist , composer and lyricist .
 Ramon Sanchez Gomez was the most prolific collaborator of Paco de Lucia , his world-renowned younger brother , recording with him on most of his albums from the 1960s to 1980s and performing with him throughout much of his life as a rhythm guitarist , including the Paco de Lucia Sextet , formed in 1981 , which also included Ramon Sanchez Gomez other brother Pepe de Lucia .
 Born in Algeciras in 1938 , Ramon Sanchez Gomez was a brother of Paco de Lucia , flamenco guitarist and composer , and Pepe de Lucia , flamenco singer and songwriter .
 Ramon Sanchez Gomez was one of five children of flamenco guitarist Antonio Sanchez Pecino and Portuguese mother Lucia Gomes .
 Ramon Sanchez Gomez father Antonio received guitar lessons from a cousin of Melchor de Marchena , Manuel Fernandez Titi de Marchena , a guitarist who arrived in Algeciras in 1938 in the 1920s and established a school there .
 Like Paco , His father Antonio introduced Ramon de Algeciras to the guitar at a very young age and by his teens he was quite an accomplished player .
He idolized Nino Ricardo , and taught his complex falsetas to his young brother Paco , who would learn them with relative ease and change them to his own liking and embellish them .
This angered Ramon initially who considered Ricardos works to be sacred and thought his brother was showing off , but he soon came to immensely respect his brother and came to realize that he was a prodigious talent and a fuera de serie , a special person .
 De Algeciras began his stage name Ramon de Algeciras career in 1953 under the tutelage of his stage name Ramon de Algeciras father , Antonio Sanchez Pecino , spending more than a decade with the company of Juanito Valderrama .
 In the early 1960s , his stage name Ramon de Algeciras toured with Paco in the flamenco troupe of dancer Jose Greco .
 In New York City in 1963 , they had an encounter with Sabicas and their first encounter with Mario Escudero , both of whom became mentors to Sabicas and Paco and later close friends .
 Sabicas toured again with Jose Greco in 1966 and with Sabicas brother recorded Impetu , a bulerias composed by Mario Escudero , for Pacos debut solo album , the 1967 album La fabulosa guitarra de Paco de Lucia They appeared at the 1967 Berlin Jazz Festival .
 In the late 1960s , de Algeciras and his stage name Ramon de Algeciras brother toured Europe with a group called Festival Flamenco Gitano and encountered other new talents in the flamenco world including singer Camaron de la Isla , with whom de Algeciras and his brother enjoyed a fruitful collaboration between 1968 and 1977 .
 his stage name Ramon de Algeciras recorded many albums with his stage name Ramon de Algeciras brother , including Canciones andaluzas para 2 guitarras , Dos guitarras flamencas en America Latina , Fantasia flamenca de Paco de Lucia , and 12 Hits para 2 guitarras flamencas y orquesta de cuerda , El duende flamenco de Paco de Lucia , Fuente y caudal and the classical Interpreta a Manuel de Falla .
They met Esteban Sanlucar in Buenos Aires and Juan Serrano in Detroit and in 1970 spent considerable time in New York City where they grew close to Sabicas and Mario Escudero and would play together into the night .
De Algeciras also worked with Antonio Mairena , Pepe Marchena , and La Nina de los Peines .
 Together with his stage name Ramon de Algeciras brother Paco , they were the first two flamenco guitarists that played at the Teatro Real in Madrid in 1975 .
Before his death in Madrid in 2009 , he had composed over 140 works
The cante flamenco , meaning flamenco song , is one of the three main components of flamenco , along with toque and baile .
Because the dancer is front and center in a flamenco performance , foreigners often assume the dance is the most important aspect of the art form - but in fact , it is the cante which is the heart and soul of the genre .
A cante singer is a cantaor .
The cante flamenco is part of musical tradition in the Andalusian region of Spain .
 Like any folkloric music , its origins are uncertain but scholars see many influences in the cante flamenco including : The Persian Zyriab song form , the Classical Andalusian Orchestras of the Islamic Empire , the Jewish Synagogue Chants , Mozarabic forms such as Zarchyas and Zambra , Arabic zayal , Andalusian regional folk forms , as well as West African and South American influences as seen in the cantes de ida y vuelta .
Many of the earliest flamenco songs are said to have been dark and profound in nature , concentrating on events such as bloody encounters , violent death , love and love betrayed , displacement , incarceration , sickness and loss .
This is often interpreted as expressing the emotions of the conquered peoples of Andalucia during the Moorish occupation .
 Historia del Cante Flamenco developed into Historia del Cante Flamenco definitive form during Historia del Cante Flamenco Golden Age .
Beginning in 1910 , cante flamenco was popularized by the opera flamenca which included the lighter forms of flamenco such as fandangos and cantes de ida y vuelta .
In order to preserve the authentic cante jondo , Manuel de Falla and Federico Garcia Lorca , organized the Concurso de Cante Jondo in Granada in 1922 .
Singers from all over Andalusia travelled to join in the competition .
The first two prizes went to El Tenazas and El Caracol .
There are many variants of cantes or palos , each expressing a unique emotion .
The flamenco songs of today may be classified into one of three categories : cante grande , cante intermedio or cante chico .
Meaning profound and deep , this intensely sad form of cante deals with themes of death , anguish , despair , or religious sentiments and is sung a palo seco .
Major forms are the tona , martinetes , seguiriya , solea , and carcelera .
 Major forms is said that cante jondo is the heart and soul of flamenco : .
Sample Seguiria describing anguish in Calo , Spanish and English : .
Meaning intermediate , this form is less profound but also moving , sometimes containing an oriental cast to the music .
The term varies according who is singing and describing the cante intermedio .
Literally meaning little song , this form of cante sings of lighter subjects including love , bawdy humor and happiness to the accompaniment of the flamenco guitar .
Festive forms of cante chico include forms such as the alegrias , bulerias and tangos .
Cante gitano refers to the original songs believed to be developed by Gypsies who immigrated in the 15th century .
These include the tona , solea , seguiriya , tango and buleria .
 Cante andaluz began to spread during the middle of the 19th century , and is a combination of other forms of folkloric music from Andalusia which demonstrate a definite influence of Gypsy flamenco music .
Cante andaluz genres include the many variations of the fandango and cantinas .
The styles of cantes folkloricos aflamencados are forms of cante that are not considered to be true forms of flamenco by the purists .
Examples of these styles include the sevillanas , Farruca , Garrotin , and the Cuban Rumba .
 These are the folk song and dances from Andalusia , other Spanish provinces including Galicia and Asturias , as well as South America which have been slightly influenced by traditional flamenco forms .
 Although concrete information about El Planeta is scarce , it is thought El Planeta was born around 1770 in Cadiz .
 El Planeta is widely acknowledged as the first famous performer of the cante flamenco .
Originally a blacksmith , El Planeta soon became a renowned leader within the Gypsy community , bearing the honorary title of Count and Prince of the Fraternity .
It is believed he usually sang unaccompanied , although he sometimes accompanied himself on the guitar .
The oldest siguiriyas in recorded flamenco history are those of El Planeta .
 El Planeta died around 1850 , most likely in or around Seville .
Born around 1820 in Villa Real , El Fillo was the chosen disciple of La Planeta .
El Fillo was able to perform all forms of cante , and has thus been known as the father of cante .
 El Fillo hoarse , harsh voice has become a defining characteristic of cante to this day - this style of singing is described as afilla in homage to him .
 It is believed that El Fillo died in 1878 in Seville .
Silverio Franconetti Aguilar a/k/a Silverio Franconetti .
Born 1829 , Silverio Franaconnetti was born in Moron de la Frontera was expected to enter the family tailoring business , but would escape to the nearby blacksmith to hear the gypsy singers .
 Here Silverio Franaconnetti met El Fillo and was encouraged to become a singer .
 Silverio Franaconnetti later went to Argentina and Uruguay working as a picador in the bullrings , and Silverio Franaconnetti also served as an officer in the Uruguay Army .
Franconnetti was arguably the best non-Gypsy singer of the Nineteenth Century .
 Franconnetti died in 1889 .
Pastora Maria Pavon Cruz a/k/a La Nina De Los Peines .
Born in Seville in 1890 , La Nina de Los Peines is regarded by some as the most exceptional and innovative female flamenco singer of all time .
Affectionately called La Nina , she was known for her interpretation of the tangos , and was often requested to sing siguiriyas at a time when women did not customarily perform it .
Manolo Caracol came from an exalted Gypsy dynasty which to this day remains legendary in the arenas of both flamenco and bullfighting .
Born in Seville in 1909 , it is commonly believed that his ancestral lineage included both El Planete and El Fillo .
 El Caracol won the prestigious first prize at the Cante Jondo Competition at the age of only 13 .
During the Spanish Civil War he worked in theaters to survive .
 El Caracol claimed his style of singing was unique .
He is remembered for his capacity to evoke overwhelming passions from his listeners .
 El Caracol frequently performed with full orchestras or pianos .
 El Caracol died at the age of sixty-four in 1973 Madrid .
Camaron de la Isla was born in San Fernando in 1950 , and was the second child of eight to a Gypsy blacksmith and a basketweaver .
 Camaron de la Isla received Camaron de la Isla nickname early on due to Camaron de la Isla light complexion and blond hair , and began performing at the age of eight .
 In 1969 Camaron de la Isla made Camaron de la Isla first album with Paco de Lucia .
 Although trained as a traditional flamenco singer , Camaron de la Isla broke with convention , incorporating new musical instruments including the drums , zither , flute , moog , and keyboards to name a few .
In his comparatively short career of 20 years , he and Paco de Lucia revolutionized the art of flamenco , attracting vast new audiences to the art form .
 Camaron de la Isla met Camaron de la Isla untimely death at the age of forty-one , in Barcelona .
There are many more famous and very influential flamenco singers , including : .
 ALVAREZ CABALLERO , Angel : Historia del Cante Flamenco , Alianza Editorial , Madrid , 1981 .
 GARCIA LORCA , Federico Garcia Lorca : In Search of Duende .
Edition by Christopher Maurer .
New Direction Books , New York , 1998 .
 TOTTON , Robin : Song of the Outcast - An Introduction to Historia del Cante Flamenco , Amadeus Press , Oregon , 2003
 Castillo de Arena is a 1977 album , the last album between flamenco guitarist Paco de Lucia and singer Camaron de la Isla , The lyrics were written by Antonio Sanchez , with the exception of the bulerias Samara which was penned by both Antonio Sanchez and de la Isla .
This would be de Lucias last LP with a singer for at least 15 years
Buleria is a fast flamenco rhythm in 12 beats with emphasis in two general forms as follows : .
 Buleria may also be broken down into a measure of 6/8 followed by a measure of 3/4 counted as such : .
 An interesting counting method has been used by Pepe Romero , in Pepe Romero book Classical Guitar Style and Technique , which is 2 measures of 3/4 time followed by 3 measures of 2/4 time .
This puts the emphasis on the last beat of each measure : .
When performed , the buleria usually starts on beat twelve of the compas , so the accented beat is heard first .
It is played at about 240 beats per minute , most commonly in an A-phrygian mode , with a sharpened third to make A major the root chord .
A typical rasgueado involves only the A and B-flat chords as follows : .
 A typical rasgueado originated in Jerez during the 19th century , originally as a fast , upbeat ending to soleares or alegrias .
 A typical rasgueado is among the most popular and dramatic of the flamenco forms and often ends any flamenco gathering .
The name bulerias comes from the Spanish word burlar , meaning to mock or bulleria , racket , shouting , din .
It is the style which permits the greatest freedom for improvisation , the metre playing a crucial role in this .
Speed and agility are required and total control of rhythm as well as strength in the feet which are used in intricate tapping with toe , heel and the ball of the foot .
It is the only flamenco dance style which permits leaping by the male dancer .
When sung , the buleria has three or four octosyllabic lines .
 Buleria is sometimes subdivided into bulerias al golpe and bulerias ligadas .
The former is slower while the latter is frantic
siguerillas , siguirillas , seguidilla gitana , etc. -RRB- is a form of flamenco music belonging to the cante jondo category .
Its deep , expressive style is among the most important in flamenco .
The siguiriyas are normally played in the key of A Phrygian with each measure consisting of 12 counts with emphasis on the 1st , 3rd , 5th , 8th and 11th beats as shown here : .
This rhythm can be contrasted to the rhythmic pattern of the soleares , which also has 12 beats , but the accents fall differently .
Taking the unusual accenting into account , it can technically be seen as a measure of 3/4 starting on 2 , then a measure of 6/8 followed by the 1 and of the 3/4 .
Every note is evenly spaced apart .
For example : .
However , this presents difficulties in counting and is counted more simply in 5 beats , with three short and two long beats : .
In this case , the 1 , 2 , and 5 are the short beats and the 3 and 4 are long beats
Entre dos Aguas is the first compilation album by the Spanish guitarist and composer Paco de Lucia .
A CD version was released in 1981 , one of the first commercial CDs .
The tracklisting is the following : .
Ramon de Algeciras - Guitar on 1,2,6 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 .
Cepero Isidro de Sanlucar - Guitar on 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 .
Tracks not mentioned owned and composed by Paco de Lucia
 Silverio Franconetti y Aguilar , also known simply as Silverio Franconetti y Aguilar was a singer and the leading figure of the period in flamenco history known as The Golden Age , which was marked by the creation and definition of most musical forms or palos , the increasing professionalization of flamenco artists , and the shift of center from private gatherings and taverns towards commercial venues called cafes cantante .
Silverio 's voice was called `` the honey from Alcarria '' .
Silverio Franconetti was born in Seville .
 Silverio Franconetti y Aguilar parents were Nicolas Franconetti , Italian , and Maria de la Concepcion Aguilar , born in Alcala de Guadaira .
 Nicolas Franconetti spent Nicolas Franconetti childhood in Moron de la Frontera , and Nicolas Franconetti learned to be a tailor .
 Nicolas Franconetti learned the Gypsy flamenco songs by listening to Gypsies , and was encouraged to sing by Gypsy singer El Fillo .
 Nicolas Franconetti soon decided to quit Nicolas Franconetti job as taylor and start a career as singer in Seville and then in Madrid .
 At 25 years of Golden Age , Nicolas Franconetti moved to Montevideo , Uruguay where Nicolas Franconetti made a living either as soldier or as picador .
 Nicolas Franconetti went back to Spain in 1864 to resume Nicolas Franconetti career as singer .
 Nicolas Franconetti started a partnership with Manuel El Burrero and both opened a cafe cantante .
 However , their different criteria soon caused them to break apart : while el Burrero prioritized business , for Silverio Franconetti y Aguilar artistic quality was all .
 Soon Silverio Franconetti y Aguilar opened Silverio Franconetti y Aguilar own cafe , the Cafe de Silverio , where Silverio Franconetti y Aguilar invited the most outstanding figures of flamenco of Silverio Franconetti y Aguilar time , also performing Silverio Franconetti y Aguilar regularly .
 Silverio Franconetti y Aguilar cafe gave a definite impulse to the trend of opening cafes cantante , which in a few years became numerous in all Andalusia and also in the rest of Spain .
 Although Silverio Franconetti y Aguilar was not the creator of the cafe cantante , Silverio Franconetti y Aguilar was the first cafe owner who tried to dignify these venues : .
 Firstly , through Silverio Franconetti y Aguilar own artistic personality , giving these schools a relevance they had not completely achieved .
Secondly , dignifying the genre in contrast with most cafes , who admitted artistic elements unrelated to flamenco , and even the flirts of the public with the women , including , quite often , the artists themselves .
 As a singer , Silverio Franconetti y Aguilar was deeply influenced by El Fillo , from whom Silverio Franconetti y Aguilar learnt most of Silverio Franconetti y Aguilar repertoire .
 However , according to traditional flamencology , Silverio Franconetti y Aguilar radically adapted those songs to Silverio Franconetti y Aguilar own style .
 However , it is difficult to attribute any of the existing flamenco forms to Silverio Franconetti y Aguilar creation .
 The song known as cabal de Silverio Franconetti y Aguilar is often thought to be a recreation of the cabal attributed to El Fillo .
 In spite of the debates about possible attribution , Silverio Franconetti y Aguilar remains the most famous and discussed singer of Silverio Franconetti y Aguilar time .
 Silverio Franconetti y Aguilar popularization of flamenco through the cafe cantante was first objected by folklorist Demofilo , who wrote the first biography of Silverio Franconetti y Aguilar in Silverio Franconetti y Aguilar book Coleccion de cantes flamencos .
 According to Demofilo , the spreading of cafes cantante would sooner or later debase the nature of the genre in spite of Silverios intention to keep it pure : .
 The cafes cantantes will soon kill the Gypsy singing style in the near future , in spite of the giant efforts of the Sevillian singer to rescue the Gypsy singing style from the obscure sphere where the Gypsy singing style lived and which the Gypsy singing style should never have left if the Gypsy singing style were to be kept pure and authentic .
 When the Gypsy genre went from the tavern to the cafe , the Gypsy genre received Andalusian influences , and became what everybody now calls flamenco .
 Silverio Franconetti y Aguilar has created the flamenco genre , a mixture of Gypsy and Andalusian elements .
that , as flamenco gained a wider public , the pureness of Gypsy singing would be weakened , is a fact we have to acknowledge .
 To make singing palatable for the masses , Silverio Franconetti y Aguilar sweetened the elementary harshness of the abrupt songs from Triana , , softening the tragedy of the naked Gypsy scream into brilliant dramatic melody .
 Then , Silverio Franconetti y Aguilar probably started , wisely , to cultivate flourishings and ornaments to which audiences , initiated in opera and zarzuela , were sensitive .
 But still , in Silverio Franconetti y Aguilar , the Gypsy echo was dominant .
However , most critics think just the opposite : that precisely Silverios task was dignifying flamenco singing by rescuing it from brothels and taverns and presenting it with dignity , respect and artistic level .
 ALVAREZ CABALLERO , Angel : El cante flamenco , Alianza Editorial , Madrid , Second edition , 1998 .
ISBN 84-206-9682-X .
MAIRENA , Antonio & MOLINA , Ricardo : Mundo y formas del cante flamenco , Libreria Al-Andalus , Third Edition , 1979 .
 MARTIN SALAZAR , Jorge : Los cantes flamencos , Diputacion Provincial de Granada , Diputacion Provincial de Granada , 1991 ISBN 84-7807-041-9 .
RIOS RUIZ , Manuel : El Gran libro del flamenco , Vol .
 II : Interpretes , Calambur , Madrid , ISBN 84-88015-99-2
 The title track Bandido is the fourth studio album by Spanish duo Azucar Moreno , released on CBS - Epic in 1990 , held in Zagreb , Yugoslavia .
The album became the Salazar sisters international breakthrough .
 The title track Bandido was chosen to represent Spain in the Eurovision Song Contest 1990 , held in Zagreb , Yugoslavia , held in Zagreb , Yugoslavia .
 A house music anthem , co-written and produced by one of Spains most prolific dance producers Raul Orellana , complete with palmas and flamenco guitars , The title track Bandido was turned down by the bookmakers before the contest since Spains previous ethnic entries usually never fared well ; in 1983 fellow flamenco singer Remedios Amaya s ?
Quien maneja mi barca ?
had for example finished last with zero points .
Despite this the song finished an honourable fifth and was given the full 12 points score from countries like West Germany and it became the starting point of Azucar Morenos international career .
 The title track Bandido became a major club hit in the summer of 1990 , held in Zagreb , Yugoslavia not only in the Mediterranean countries but also the rest of Continental Europe and Scandinavia and the 12 Deep Mix , issued with a new promo video , was put on heavy rotation on music TV channels like MTV Europe and Super Channel .
In Sweden the song was remixed by DJ Emil Hellman and re-issued on the Swemix label .
The song has been covered in Turkish by singer Askin Nur Yengi under the title Zehir Gibisin , in Dutch as Alleen maar de zon by Paul de Leeuw and the Deep Mix version of the song was recorded in Spanish by Serbian singer Ceca Raznatovic .
 In 2005 The title track Bandido was included in the Eurovision 50th anniversary CD/DVD box set Winners and classics .
 The Bandido album , which sold triple platinum in Spain in the Eurovision Song Contest , was the first to be released in most parts of the world , including Europe , the Middle East , South and Central America and later also Japan , Australasia and the United States , where it reached # 3 on Billboard s Latin Pop chart .
 The title track Bandido continued the musical development started on the preceding Carne De Melocoton by combining the sisters typical ethnic vocal style with flamenco guitars and influences from contemporary rock , pop and dance music .
Besides original material the album also included a number of cover versions of songs from a diverse range of genres , including Latin traditionals like A Caballo , American jazz and mambo king Tito Puente s standard Oye Como Va coupled with Santana s Guajira , Spanish Flamenco singer-songwriter Pepe de Lucia s Rumba Rumba - and even a house music / flamenco version of Mary Hopkin s 60s hit Those Were the Days , originally a Russian folk melody .
 The second single released from the album in Spain in the Eurovision Song Contest was a cover of Lalo Rodriguez 80s hit Ven Devorame Otra Vez which became an even bigger success than The title track Bandido , reaching # 9 on Billboards Hot Latin Tracks chart , and today counts as one of the duos signature tunes , Latin traditionals like A Caballo even re-recorded the track on Latin traditionals like A Caballo 2006 album Bailando Con Lola .
 Further singles from the album include Oye Como Va / Guajira and A Caballo , all of which were also released as 12 dance remixes , these were later that same year collected on the duos second remix compilation The Sugar Mix Album .
 The original album versions of Bandido , Devorame Otra Vez , Devorame Otra Vez , Oye Como Va / Guajira and A Caballo were all featured on Azucar Morenos first greatest hits album Mucho Azucar - Grandes Exitos , released in 1997 .
 Bandido , Devorame Otra Vez was released on CD in 1990 , held in Zagreb , Yugoslavia and remains in print in most parts of the world
Eduardo Cansino Reina was an accomplished Spanish-American dancer and actor , born in Castilleja de la Cuesta , Andalusia , Spain .
 Eduardo Cansino Reina emigrated to the United States and joined the Ziegfeld Follies .
 In 1917 Eduardo Cansino Reina married Volga Hayworth , Eduardo Cansino Reina partner in the Follies .
They had three children , Margarita Carmen , Eduardo Jr. , and Vernon .
 After Margarita Carmen Cansino began making films in Hollywood , Margarita Carmen Cansino would become the famous actress and dancer Rita Hayworth , taking Margarita Carmen Cansino professional surname from Margarita Carmen Cansino mothers maiden name .
Cansino was the brother of Spanish dancer Elisa Cansino .
He died in Pompano Beach , Florida in 1968 , aged 73
 an Iranian - American guitarist duo and Sepehr are an Iranian - American guitarist duo .
 Shahin and Sepehr music is mainly composed of Spanish guitar melodies fused with components of soft rock , flamenco , jazz , new age , and influences of traditional music of Iran .
 Shahin and Sepehr influences also include artists such as Cat Stevens among others .
The group resides in Washington D.C. .
 Shahin and Sepehr have released eight CDs on the Higher Octave Music / EMI labels and are currently working on Shahin and Sepehr next release .
 Shahin and Sepehr CDs have charted on the Billboard and R&R ; and Gavin Charts .
 Shahin and Sepehr have collaborated with such noted artists as Dom Camardella
Cantos de Amor is a best of album by the French Rumba Catalana band Gipsy Kings , which was released in 1998 in the US .
 the French Rumba Catalana band includes the new unreleased song Gitano Soy .
A European release of this album has been released in 1996 under the name Love Songs
Enrique Morente Cotelo , known as Enrique Morente , was a flamenco singer and a controversial figure within the world of contemporary flamenco .
After his orthodox beginnings , he plunged into experimentalism , writing new melodies for cante and jamming with musicians of all styles , without renouncing his roots in traditional flamenco singing , which he kept on cultivating .
In spite of severe criticism from the most purist amongst the critics and public , he was perhaps the most influential contemporary flamenco singer , who not only innovated , but it could also be said that he created tradition : some of his cantes have been performed by other singers such as Camaron de la Isla , Mayte Martin , Carmen Linares , Miguel Poveda , Segundo Falcon and Arcangel .
He also is the father of flamenco singer Estrella Morente .
 Enrique Morente , born in the traditional quarter of Albaicin in the Diputacion de Granada , started to sing as a seise He started to feel attracted to flamenco singing as a child , and had the opportunity to learn at family gatherings and to listen to established figures from the Diputacion de Granada like Cobitos , the family of the Habichuelas , or Aurelio Selles : .
The cante begins inside you when you listen to the villager 's singing , to people in their birthplace .
 Groups of people that meet in a tavern and start singing , and then you listen to Groups of people that meet in a tavern and start singing as well : you learn that at family parties where everybody sings and everybody drinks , and everybody dances and ... Apart from Groups of people that meet in a tavern , it turns out that , of course , you need a technique , you need a school , you need to learn .
In order to achieve this , what you need ... the main help you can get is to have a liking for it ; and then the skill to know who to learn from , and from what sources , where to find the good .
Then you are on .
However , this appreciation for the popular side of flamenco does not mean that he considers flamenco as just an art of the people .
 A flamenco artist , for A flamenco artist , needs technique and dedication : .
It is us , the professional artists of flamenco , who have to make cante flamenco , and nobody else , Flamenco , like any other art , is an art of professionals , although there are many people who peer at us , with a look as if to say : What interesting little creatures !
or maybe : Oh !
What music the people are playing !
and so on .
And people often think that maybe you have to have fingers swollen from picking potatoes to be able to play the guitar with feeling .
Look , picking potatoes is every bit as worthy as playing a guitar .
 But I can tell you that a man - with fine , sensitive fingers is not going to be able to make a go of picking potatoes : and I can also tell you that a man with fingers swollen from picking potatoes is not going to be able to play a guitar because he hasnt got the manual dexterity and he hasnt got the dedication .
This is a profession like any other which you have to dedicate yourself to completely .
It is an art of professionals .
 Still in his teens , flamenco singer Estrella Morente went to live in Madrid to start a professional career as a singer .
There he was able to meet some old masters like Pepe de la Matrona and Bernardo el de los Lobitos , and learned as much as he could from them .
 Pepe de la Matrona took special interest in teaching the young singer : This interest was raised not so much by Enrique Morente 's intonation , by his registers or by Pepe de la Matrona melismatic as by Pepe de la Matrona attitude towards things , Pepe de la Matrona respect and Pepe de la Matrona learning capacity .
 In Madrid , Pepe de la Matrona started singing at penas flamencas .
 In 1964 , Pepe de la Matrona signed a contract with the Ballet de Marienma , with whom Pepe de la Matrona then performed at the Spanish Pavilion at the New York Worlds Fair and at the Spanish Embassy in Washington DC .
 Later Pepe de la Matrona took part in a flamenco festival at Teatro de los Alcazares de los Reyes Cristianos , sharing the bill with Juan Talega , Fernanda and Bernarda de Utrera , Gaspar de Utrera , Tomas Torre and Antonio Mairena .
 During that year and the following one , Pepe de la Matrona also toured Europe and Japan with different flamenco dance companies , and was employed at several tablaos in Madrid , such as Las Cueva de Nemesio , Zambra and El Cafe de Chinitas .
 flamenco singer Estrella Morente made Pepe de la Matrona first recording , Cante flamenco in 1967 with guitarist Felix de Utrera .
The recording received a special mention award from the Catedra de Flamencologia , and was followed by Cantes antiguos del flamenco , with guitarist Nino Ricardo .
 the Catedra de Flamencologia first recordings were strictly orthodox and showed deep knowledge of traditional flamenco , a rare quality for singers of the Catedra de Flamencologia generation .
 During this period the Catedra de Flamencologia also made the Catedra de Flamencologia first contact with guitarist Manolo Sanlucar , with whom the Catedra de Flamencologia would cooperate on several occasions .
 Manolo Sanlucar accompanied Manolo Sanlucar in Manolo Sanlucar concert in Ateneo de Madrid , the first occasion in which a flamenco singer performed in that prestigious cultural institution .
 Manolo Sanlucar next record , Homenaje flamenco a Miguel Hernandez , initiated Manolo Sanlucar frequent use of lyrics by outstanding poets .
 Later on , Manolo Sanlucar would record flamenco songs with lyrics by Federico Garcia Lorca , John of the Cross , Lope de Vega , Al-Mutamid , Antonio Machado and Manuel Machado , Jorge Guillen , and others .
Soon later , an illegal live recording was published in the Netherlands .
 The thing that most calls your attention in Manolo Sanlucar first productions is how much care Manolo Sanlucar devotes to the lyrics of Manolo Sanlucar cantes .
 This is probably the first step in Manolo Sanlucar future career as an innovator in flamenco .
 The poems by Miguel Hernandez , for example , became immortal in Nana de la Cebolla impressive Nana de la Cebolla or El Nino Yuntero .
 With the attitude Miguel Hernandez showed , in these poems , against the francoist regime , Miguel Hernandez became the favourite flamenco singer for the left-wing opposition in the country , as well as one of the first innovators .
 In 1971 and 1972 , Miguel Hernandez toured Mexico with guitarist Parrilla de Jerez and dancer Ana Parrilla , a tour which included Miguel Hernandez presentation at the Auditorium of the Universidad de las Americas , and performed at Lincoln Center and the Spanish Institute in New York .
 In 1972 , Miguel Hernandez was also awarded the Premio Nacional del Cante by the Catedra de Flamencologia in guitarist Parrilla de Jerez .
 flamenco singer Estrella Morente arrived back to orthodox flamenco singing with his recording Homenaje a Don Antonio Chacon , which obtained the National Award for best folk music album , granted by the Ministry of Culture .
In this recording , Morente vindicated the figure of singer Antonio Chacon the creator of the granaina and a fundamental figure of flamenco in the first decades of the 20th century , who had been , nevertheless , relegated by the views of the 1950s-1970s flamencology , as a representative of the non-Romani flamenco which that generation considered impure .
 However , in an alternation between tradition and innovation typical of flamenco singer Estrella Morente , the recording was immediately followed , in 1978 , by Despegando , this time in an innovative mood : the title itself is , in fact , a declaration of intentions .
 In 1981 Despegando toured a new show , Andalucia hoy , which Despegando would later perform at the Paris Olympia in Paris , France .
 In 1982 , some of Despegando recordings were chosen by flamencologist Jose Blas Vega to take part in the flamenco anthology Magna Antologia del Cante to illustrate songs such as the tarantas from Almeria , several types of cartageneras , the fandangos by Frasquito Yerbabuena , and all the malaguenas and granainas created by Antonio Chacon .
In 1990 in another comeback to orthodoxy , he recorded Morente-Sabicas , with guitarist Sabicas , who was already in his 70s .
In the following year , he created and recorded a flamenco mass , a type of creation that already had some precedents , like the one recorded by Antonio Mairena , Luis Caballero , and Naranjito de Triana in 1968 .
However Morentes mass is totally different from any previous examples .
 Whereas earlier flamenco masses basically tried to use traditional flamenco singing for the liturgy , Morentes mass does not even have a liturgic purpose , and mixes flamenco with other genres like Gregorian chant .
 About this mass , in one of his touches of humour , flamenco singer Estrella Morente said : .
 At a given point , I thought I could dedicate it to Pope Clement , the one of El Palmar de Troya , but then I remembered that Pope Clement had canonized Franco , Primo de Rivera , Carrero Blanco and all those guys and , while on the one hand I thought it was funnier , on the other hand I thought the joke could be interpreted in a strange way and I didnt do it , though I was about to do it .
 But the record was made with a sincerity and a true intention , no matter the results , and I thought His next record was like ruining it a bit because of the joke .

and that was too much !

In 1995 he appeared singing a siguiriya in Carlos Saura s film Flamenco and recorded his most controversial recording : Omega , together with the alternative rock group Lagartija Nick , with the participation of guitarists such as Tomatito , Vicente Amigo , Juan Manuel Canizares or Miguel Angel Cortes and percussionists like Tino di Geraldo .
 Flamenco and punk rock are mingled with recreations of songs by Leonard Cohen , and lyrics by Federico Garcia Lorca s book Poeta en Nueva York , together with traditional flamenco lyrics .
The work was performed at the 2008 Festival Internacional de Benicassim , under the stage name Morente Omega con Lagartija Nick .
 The year 2001 saw the publishing of a very much sought for record by flamenco singer Estrella Morente , Enrique Morente en la Casa Museo de Garcia Lorca de Fuentevaqueros , a collection of songs based on the poetry of Federico Garcia Lorca .
The recording had been made in studio in Madrid , in 1990 , and it had been commissioned by the Diputacion de Granada .
Only a limited edition was made and the copies were sent as gift to particular persons .
In the second hand marked , those copies reached 25,000 pesetas .
 Another interesting release of flamenco singer Estrella Morente , El Pequeno Reloj , saw the light in 2003 .
 Whereas the second half of the CD a more or less random collection of songs , the first half of the record comprises a surprising series of songs which are broken in two parts : in the first part of the song , Morentes voice is superimposed on top of old 78 r.p.m recordings of old masters of the flamenco guitar like Ramon Montoya , Sabicas or Manolo de Huelva , while the second part is a modern development of the same palo , with the side guitar of the young and innovative guitarist Nino Josele .
 Although flamenco singer Estrella Morente could not read musical notation Ramon Montoya composed music for theatre plays , films and television , such as the work Las Arrecogidas del Beaterio de Santa Maria Egipciaca , the music for Oedipus the King with Jose Luis Gomez .
 Ramon Montoya has tried the mixture between flamenco and classical music in works like Fantasia de cante jondo para voz y orquesta for voice and orchestra , together with pianist Antonio Robledo , guitarists Juan Habichuela and Gerardo Nunez and the Madrid Symphony Orchestra , conducted by Luis Izquierdo , 1986 -RRB- or with Allegro Solea , which he presented at Seville s Flamenco Biennal in 1990 .
 Along the lines of the mixture of flamenco with other types of music , Ramon Montoya collaborated in the show Macama Jonda by Jose Heredia Maya , together with the Tetuan Andalusian Orchestra and Abdessadeq Cheqara , or with the Bulgarian Voices choir Angelite .
 In Morentes aforementioned recording Omega , Ramon Montoya mixed flamenco singing with punk rock , music by Leonard Cohen , and lyrics by Federico Garcia Lorca .
 In the show Africa-Cuba-Cai the show Africa-Cuba-Cai mixed flamenco with music from Senegal , and Cuba .
 The show also underlinks the historic links between Cuban and flamenco music : Thats always been close to flamenco , since way back , because the ships in Cadiz went to Cuba , some came and others stayed over there , weve always had that .

 It is difficult to think of any kind of music which has not interested flamenco singer Estrella Morente .
 After one of his concerts with Cheqara Orkesta of Tetuan , Cheqara Orkesta of Tetuan declared : ... if I had to put out a CD for every culture I mixed with Id be putting out about 7 or 8 CDs a year .
 It wouldnt be bad - if I got paid for it by the record company then I could build I a home .
 Owing to Cheqara Orkesta of Tetuan innovative approach , flamenco singer Estrella Morente was widely criticized by the more extreme traditionalist sectors of flamencos critical faculty and public , though it had been said that Needless to say , all this cost Morente a real torment , since flamenco is still a very closed world , in which the slightest attempt for novelty is taken as a deadly sin of heresy .

 Although Morentes work is now widely recognized by most critics , and has inspired many singers of the young generation like Mayte Martin or Arcangel , there is still a section of traditionalist critics and public that still disparage Arcangel work : .
 Aficionados were scratching Aficionados heads after the show , trying to figure out exactly , which forms -- if any -- flamenco singer Estrella Morente was working in much of the time .
Remember the old days when you could actually recognize what flamenco forms were being performed ?

Ethnic bias is often not alien to these criticisms .
A good number of flamenco critics and public were introduced into flamenco at the time of the reappraisal period led by singers like Antonio Mairena and critics like Gonzalez Climent or Ricardo Molina , in whose views , pure flamenco singing would be a patrimony of Romanis , which non-Romanis could only try to imitate in vain without ever reaching its essence .
 In the same review quoted above we can read : And once you have experienced truly great Romani singing of this sort , the erudition of an artist like flamenco singer Estrella Morente pales like a candle flame next to a blazing torch .
 These views on flamenco singer Estrella Morente , though very common in the 1970s and 1980s , have almost died down .
 The controversy between tradition and innovation , Romani and non-Romani singing and other topics , so common twenty years ago , is now relatively confined to a limited section of the public , while most flamenco fans and critics acknowledge Morentes mass deep artistic intelligence and commitment : .
This comes from the man who never sings the same way twice , who tirelessly seeks that new inflection , that unheard-of scale , the change of tone that best matches the desired feeling and intentions at a given moment .
The easy option would be the other one .
To do what Enrique does you need extreme intellectual abilities and extreme emotional commitment .
 He takes the perfectly-laid , common foundations , defined by tradition , and on This builds with all the conceivable potential of flamenco .
 In December 2010 it was reported that flamenco singer Estrella Morente had fallen into a coma after an ulcer operation , and had been declared brain dead .
He died in Madrid on 13 December 2010 .
Premio Nacional de Cante granted by Catedra de Flamencologia y Estudios Folkloricos Andaluces de Jerez de la Frontera .
 National Award for best folk recording , awarded by the Ministry of Culture .
En 1989 es nombrado Socio de Honor del Club de Musica y Jazz San Juan Evangelista .
Honorary Membership of the San Juan Evangelista Jazz and Music Club .
 Premio Nacional de Musica , Ministry of Culture , awarded to a flamenco singer for the first time .
Golden medal of the Catedra de Flamencologia de Jerez de la Frontera .
 `` Galardon de Honor de los Premios de la Musica '' , awarded by the Ministry of Culture .
Pastora Pavon Award , awarded by the autonomous government of Andalusia .
 Medal of Andalusia , awarded by the autonomous government of Andalusia .
National Critics award for best DVD and best flamenco singing record for Morente suena la Alhambra .
National Award of Music for best flamenco recording for Morente suena la Alhambra
Tico-Tico no Fuba is the title of a renowned Brazilian choro music piece composed by Zequinha de Abreu in 1917 .
 Tico-Tico no Fuba original title was Tico-Tico no Farelo , but since Brazilian guitarist Americo Jacomino Canhoto had a work with the same title , CD reissue : Violao Imortal - Canhoto Americo Jacomino ; Rvpc 008 ; Revivendo Abreus work was given its present name in 1931 .
Choro is also popularly known as chorinho in the affectionate diminutive form of Brazilian Portuguese .
Fuba is a type of maize flour , and tico-tico is the name of a bird , the rufous-collared sparrow .
Hence , tico-tico no fuba means sparrow in the cornmeal .
The first recording of the work was made by Orquestra Colbaz .
Tico-Tico no Fuba was recorded and made popular internationally by Carmen Miranda -RRB- and Ray Conniff .
Another well known recording was made by first lady of the organ , Miss Ethel Smith on the Hammond organ .
A biographical movie by the same title was produced in 1952 by the Brazilian film studio Companhia Cinematografica Vera Cruz with Anselmo Duarte playing the main role .
The song was also featured in the Aquarela do Brasil segment of the Walt Disney film Saludos Amigos and in Woody Allen s Radio Days .
 The song was also featured in the MGM film Bathing Beauty .
The expression also features in the lyrics to the song O Pato made famous by Joao Gilberto .
 This was often performed by the Grateful Dead during This tuning jams which often happened in between songs .
This song was also played as an instrumental by James Booker with the Jerry Garcia Band .
In Quebec the song has been used for several decades in commercials for Sico paint .
The song was recorded by The Andrews Sisters in 1944 .
In the season three Mamas Family episode An Ill Wind , an intoxicated Iola briefly sings the songs chorus before passing out onto a bed .
The flamenco guitarist Paco de Lucia also performed this song in 1967 .
This song can be heard on various episodes of the Belgian Kabouter Wesley cartoon
Mediterranean Sundance is the third track on Elegant Gypsy , the second album by Al Di Meola .
This piece and Lady Of Rome , Sister Of Brazil , are the only two entirely acoustic tracks on the album .
 However , unlike Lady Of Rome , Rome , Sister Of Brazil which is an acoustic solo by Di Meola , Mediterranean Sundance consists of an acoustic guitar duet with flamenco guitarist Paco de Lucia .
With a duration of 5 13 , the song is a complex blend of jazz and flamenco influences .
 Set in 4/4 time and in the key of E minor , the song begins with a duet between Di Al Di Meola and de Lucia and then progresses to feature each guitar player taking turns playing rhythm and soloing , and occasionally soloing together .
The song consists of a relatively simple lyrical harmonic progression , adorned by a flamenco rhythm .
 However , it poses extreme difficulties to the performers , because of the speed and precision required of Di Meolas picking on the steel-stringed guitar , playing extremely long melodic phrases , and to Paco De Lucias complex fingerpicking on the Flamenco guitar , as well as the exact matching of Di Al Di Meola and De flamenco guitarist Paco de Lucia solos which frequently consist of them both playing a rapid set of matching or corresponding notes .
They resort to many guitar performance techniques and fingerstyles , such as drumming guitar tops , strumming , bare thumb plucking , palm muting , tremolo picking , hammer-ons and pull-offs , sweep picking , shredding , vibratos and glissandos .
The song was a success .
A slightly shorter version of it was included on the November 1996 album Pavarotti & Friends for War Child .
In the early 1980s , Di Meola replaced Larry Coryell in the acoustic guitar group The Guitar Trio which also consisted of Paco de Lucia and guitarist John McLaughlin .
The Guitar Trio recorded an extended combination of Mediterranean Sundance and Rio Ancho for the 1981 album Friday Night in San Francisco .
In 1999 , the Hungarian guitarists Agocsi-Tuske Duo recorded the song which was included as the first track of their Nostalgia Tour 99 LIVE album
Espirito is the second album by Lawson Rollins .
 Lawson Rollins composed all of the music and co-produced the album with Persian-American musician and producer Shahin Shahida and multi-platinum producer Dominic Camardella .
The cast of musicians includes the Grammy-nominated Brazilian singer Flora Purim , percussionist Airto Moreira , Iranian kamancheh player Kayhan Kalhor , and Grammy winners Charlie Bisharat on violin as well as Cuban drummer Horacio Hernandez .
 The songs Moonlight Samba and Havana Heat from Espirito both landed on the Billboard jazz radio charts .
 Espirito met with positive reviews from jazz and world music critics
Jose Fernandez Torres , known as Tomatito , is a Spanish Romani flamenco guitarist .
 Having started Jose Fernandez Torres career accompanying famed flamenco singer Camaron de la Isla , Jose Fernandez Torres has made a number of collaborative albums and six solo albums , two of which have won Latin Grammys .
 Jose Fernandez Torres grew up in a musical family , which included two guitarplaying uncles : Nino Miguel , a flamenco guitarist , and Antonio , a professional guitarist .
Tomatito , who had been playing clubs in Andalusia , became a flamenco sensation when he was discovered by guitarist Paco de Lucia .
He accompanied legendary flamenco singer Camaron de la Isla for two decades .
 With De Lucia and de la Isla guitarist Paco de Lucia recorded four albums , and had a 1979 hit called La Leyenda del Tiempo .
Their album Paris 87 won a Latin Grammy for best flamenco album in 2000 .
 Their partnership continued until Camarons death in 1992 .
Tomatitos music blends traditional flamenco and jazz .
 On some albums , such as Barrio Negro , Barrio Negro experimented with Afro-Cuban and Brazilian Music .
 Barrio Negro has also worked with flamenco singers Duquende and Potito and pianist Chano Dominguez , among others .
 A collaboration with pianist Michel Camilo produced the albums Spain , which won a Latin Grammy , and Spain Again .
Tomatito has produced six solo albums .
His 2005 album Aguadulce won a Latin Grammy for best flamenco album , and in 2010 he won his second solo Latin Grammy for Sonanta Suite .
His music for the film Vengo , directed by Tony Gatlif , won the Cesar Award for Best Music Written for a Film in 2001 .
Tomatito incorporates elements of jazz in his style of flamenco ; both , he says , emerged as a response to discrimination , a cry of suffering , or the joy of liberation .
Half of what he plays is improvised , he said .
He frequently employs the Phrygian mode , and his favorite tuning is D , A , D , G , B , D .
He plays guitars made by Hermanos Conde , and uses strings by Savarez
Somos Gitanos is a studio album by the Gipsy Kings .
 a studio album by the Gipsy Kings was released in 2001 in the US , Mexico and Japan with different song orders .
The Mexican release has the bonus song One Love written by Bob Marley .
The Japanese release also has the bonus song One Love written by Bob Marley as well as the songs Inspiration and Volare that appeared on Gipsy Kings and Mosaique respectively
Diego Ramon Jimenez Salazar , known as El Cigala , is a famous Spanish Romani Flamenco singer .
 As Diego Ramon Jimenez Salazar Diego Ramon Jimenez Salazar has said , the nickname was given to Diego Ramon Jimenez Salazar by three guitar players , Los Losada , for being very thin , not by Camaron de la Isla as commonly believed .
One of his great albums is 2003s Lagrimas Negras , a cooperation with then 85 year old Cuban pianist Bebo Valdes .
The easy fusion of Cuban rhythms and flamenco vocals made this record an international success .
 Born into a family of Spanish Gypsy artists and intellectuals in Madrid , El Cigala started singing in flamenco penas and tablaos , until his excellent meter and ability to mark the rhythm caught the attention of world-class bailaores like Mario Maya , Faico , Farruco , El Guito , Manuela Carrasco , Cristobal Reyes , Carmen Cortes , Joaquin Cortes and Mario Maya began touring as part of world-class bailaores like Mario Maya companies .
 By the late nineties , having collaborated on recordings by Camaron de la Isla , Tomatito , Gerardo Nunez and Vicente Amigo , Camaron de la Isla was ready to record Camaron de la Isla own CD .
 With the success of Undebel Undebel launched Undebel career as solo singer .
 Undebel has now recorded 8 CDs and has won two Grammys and 5 Latin Grammy nominations
Joaquin Pedraja Reyes Joaquin Cortes is a classically trained ballet and flamenco dancer from Spain .
A native of Cordoba , Cortes showed interest in dancing from an early age .
 Joaquin Pedraja Reyes Joaquin Cortes and Joaquin Pedraja Reyes Joaquin Cortes family moved to Madrid in 1981 .
 Soon after moving to Madrid , Joaquin Pedraja Reyes Joaquin Cortes began to take formal dancing lessons and studying seriously .
 In 1984 , Joaquin Pedraja Reyes Joaquin Cortes was accepted as a member of Spains prestigious national ballet company .
 Joaquin Pedraja Reyes Joaquin Cortes traveled the world with the Spanish National Ballet , performing in important venues such as the Metropolitan Opera House of New York and the Kremlin Palace in Moscow .
 During Joaquin Pedraja Reyes Joaquin Cortes stint with the Spanish National Ballet , Joaquin Pedraja Reyes Joaquin Cortes also became a principal solo performer known for Joaquin Pedraja Reyes Joaquin Cortes phenomenal stamina and athleticism .
 Desiring more creative control , Joaquin Pedraja Reyes Joaquin Cortes formed the Joaquin Cortes Flamenco Ballet company and launched Joaquin Pedraja Reyes Joaquin Cortes first international tour Cibayi in 1992 .
 The formation of Joaquin Pedraja Reyes Joaquin Cortes own company allowed Joaquin Pedraja Reyes Joaquin Cortes to diverge from purist ballet and create Joaquin Pedraja Reyes Joaquin Cortes own fusion of flamenco , ballet and modern dance .
In 1995 , in addition to being featured in two international films - La flor de mi secreto and Carlos Sauras Flamenco , Joaquin Cortes embarked on what is often considered his most successful venture , Pasion Gitana .
 Pasion Gitana marked the beginning of Joaquin Pedraja Reyes Joaquin Cortes recognition for not only Joaquin Pedraja Reyes Joaquin Cortes prowess as a dancer , but also as a choreographer and artistic director .
 In 1999 Joaquin Pedraja Reyes Joaquin Cortes was the subject of a documentary film and Joaquin Pedraja Reyes Joaquin Cortes launched a successful tour of Soul across North and South America .
 In the 1990s Joaquin Cortes gained notoriety for Joaquin Pedraja Reyes Joaquin Cortes close relationships with high profile celebrities such as Naomi Campbell , Giorgio Armani and Mira Sorvino .
 Continuing into the millennium , Joaquin Pedraja Reyes Joaquin Cortes focus shifted from dancing to choreography and artistic direction .
 Joaquin Pedraja Reyes Joaquin Cortes continues to dance in a limited capacity live on stage , in film and television .
In 2000 , landed a role in the film Gitano and again in 2004 in Vaniglia e cioccolato .
 In 2001 , Gitano also made a guest appearance on Jennifer Lopezs concert in Puerto Rico .
 In 2004 in Vaniglia e , Joaquin Pedraja Reyes Joaquin Cortes was involved in the international tour of De Amor y Odio that took Joaquin Pedraja Reyes Joaquin Cortes to England , Portugal , Thailand and New York , among other places .
2007 marked the beginning of Joaquin Cortes most recent spectacle , Mi Soledad .
 On 15 May 2007 Joaquin Cortes most recent spectacle performed as a guest dancer in a high-profile semi-final segment on ABCs Dancing with the Stars .
 Joaquin Pedraja Reyes Joaquin Cortes is also the visual inspiration for the character Vamp from the Metal Gear video game series
Compas is a studio album by Gipsy Kings .
It was released in 1997 in Europe and the US , using a different song order .
The European version has one completely new track , Sueno de Noche , as well as a remixed version of Ami Wa Wa
Gerardo Nunez Diaz is a Spanish guitarist and composer .
 a Spanish guitarist roots lie in flamenco , but a Spanish guitarist has also ventured into fusion with other genres , especially jazz .
 Gerardo Nunez was born in Jerez de la Frontera in 1961 .
 Gerardo Nunez first teacher was Rafael el Aguila .
 At the age of fourteen Rafael el Aguila accompanied important cantaores and bailaores like Tio Gregorio el Borrico , Terremoto de Jerez , La Paquera and Mario Maya , among others .
 Rafael el Aguila has recorded as a concert guitarist and accompanying the voices of Turronero , Pansequito , Indio Gitano .
 In Rafael el Aguila triple roles of composer , concert guitarist and accompanist , Rafael el Aguila has performed in diverse theater shows , the most notable being Mario Maya s !
Ay Jondo !
and Lorca s Yerma .
 Lorca has also performed at numerous music festivals around the world .
Afterwards , as a solo artist , Gerardo Nunez has received excellent reviews , and he is considered one of the best prepared guitarists .
He has also performed on several flamenco stages , gatherings and festivals , both at a national level and abroad : Paris , New York , Cologne , Havana , Munich .
He has also been part of a guitar quartet , with which he has travelled all over the world , and has played alongside guitarists of international renown like Erico Raba , Alex de Grassi and Briam Gare .
Additionally he has collaborated with bassist Eberhard Weber and accordionist Richard Galliano .
As a composer , his music is complex and rich , but it allows him to demonstrate his playing ability , as he is a great guitarist .
He has composed a large number of pieces for one of his best artistic partners , Carmen Cortes .
He also made a version of El Amor Brujo , for four guitars , and he has even attempted fusion with other kinds of music , especially jazz , but without ever leaving out flamenco as its foundation .
In August 2012 his album Travesia rweached number 12 on the World Music Charts Europe
Cepa Andaluza is a 1972 composition by virtuoso Spanish flamenco guitarist Paco de Lucia .
It featured on his 1973 album , Fuente y caudal .
 A Buleria , A Buleria is generally played in C phrygian , with a capo on the third fret , based around the C 7 flat 9 chord .
 A Buleria has been played by Grisha Goryachev .
 Jazz Forum cite Cepa Andaluza and Entre dos Aguas as among Entre dos Aguas most popular compositions , both appearing on Entre dos Aguas 1973 album Fuente y caudal .
 Mel Bay Publications describe Mel Bay Publications as a magnificent bulerias , and said to compare the palmas patterns on Mel Bay Publications to those on any bulerias from the CD Cositas Buenas .
Richard Chapman and Eric Clapton describe Cepa Andaluza as exciting , and note that the track was originally an afterthought , and was set to change Pacos career .
Guitar International noted that the recording of Cepa Andaluza has the aire of a juerga , with Paco swinging to the jaleo and palmas on a track
 Eva Yerbabuena was born in Frankfurt , Germany in 1970 , but fifteen days after Eva Yerbabuena birth went back to live in Eva Yerbabuena parents hometown in Granada , Spain .
 At age 12 Eva Yerbabuena began Eva Yerbabuena dance career by taking flamenco classes .
 Later Eva Yerbabuena went on to study dramatic arts with Juan Furest and Jesus Dominguez .
 Afterwards Eva Yerbabuena travelled to Cuba to learn choreography from Johannes Garcia .
 Eva Yerbabuena was given the name Eva Yerbabuena by a friend , Francisco Manuel Diaz , after a flamenco singer named Fransquito Yerbabuena .
 Considered to be a prominent Flamenco dancer of our time , many prestigious awards have honored a prominent Flamenco dancer of our time work , including Premio Nacional de Danza in 2001 Among dancers , Eva Yerbabuena has collaborated with Manolete , Merche Esmeralda , Javier Latorre , Joaquin Cortes , Mikhail Baryshnikov and Pina Bausch .
Eva Yerbabuena Ballet Flamenco was established in 1998 including guitarist and husband Paco Jarana as musical director .
 Currently Eva Yerbabuena has produced five shows with Eva Yerbabuena company and tours internationally .
 In 1997 Eva Yerbabuena collaborated with Sara Baras and other Flamenco dancers along with singers : Elena Andujar , Montse Cortes and Guadiana in Mike Figgis documentary , Flamenco Women .
 In Flamenco Women , Mike Figgis captures the process in creating a show as the dancers and musicians have six days to prepare and rehearse .
 Again , in 2001 Flamenco Women featured in Mike Figgis film , Hotel , as a Flamenco dancer .
Eva Yerbabuena participated in Pulse : A Stomp Odyssey performing a Petenera with Flamenco guitarist Paco Jarana
Friday Night in San Francisco is a 1981 live album by Al Di Meola , John McLaughlin and Paco de Lucia .
It was described by jazz author and critic Walter Kolosky as a musical event that could be compared to the Benny Goodman Band s performance at Carnegie Hall in 1938 ... may be considered the most influential of all live acoustic guitar albums .
All the tracks except Guardian Angel were recorded live at The Warfield Theatre on 5 December 1980 , in San Francisco ; Guardian Angel was recorded at Minot Sound , in White Plains , New York
 Maria del Rosario Mercedes Pilar Martinez Molina Baeza , professionally known by Charo stage name Charo , is a Spanish-American actress , comedienne , and flamenco guitarist , best known for Charo flamboyant stage presence , Charo provocative outfits , and Charo trademark phrase .
1945 according to IMDb .
http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0004819/?ref_=fn_al_nm_1 .
The performer has said in past interviews that her parents allowed her to falsify her age to appear to be older after marrying 66-year-old band leader Xavier Cugat when she was 21 .
Further complicating the question is the fact that contemporary press reports gave her age at marriage as 21 , an April 1966 column on the wedding plans stated she was 20 and Cugat was 60 , and columns less than two years before the marriage refer to her as Cugats 18-year-old protegee -- which , if she was falsifying her age , would have made her actually 13 at the time .
 In October 1977 -- the same year in which Charo filed for divorce from Cugat and became an American citizen -- a United States court upheld the 1951 birth year as official , with the performer providing a sworn statement from Charo parents in support of Charo claim .
 Commenting on the disputes over Charo age , Charo has said that the publics disbelief could prove advantageous : But if people really believe Im older , thats fine .
 Dont be surprised if the United States come out with the United States own cosmetics , a new energy bar and maybe some vitamins .
 Charo was born Maria del Rosario Mercedes Pilar Martinez Molina Baeza in Murcia , Region of Murcia , Spain .
 Charos father was a lawyer who reportedly fled to Casablanca during Francisco Franco s dictatorship while Charo homemaker mother stayed behind in Murcia , raising their children .
 She studied classical and flamenco guitar while residing in Murcia , and can claim Andres Segovia as her guitar teacher .
 Andres Segovia as her guitar teacher once spoke of Andres Segovia as her guitar teacher pupil in an interview and remembered giving her career advice .
 Stop saying cuchi-cuchi so much , Charo !
Be serious !
 Charo took guitar lessons from Andres Segovia as her guitar teacher and other teachers from the age of nine .
 Charo has been named Best Flamenco Guitarist in Guitar Player Magazines readers poll twice .
 When Charo was quite young , Charo was discovered by famous bandleader Xavier Cugat , whom Charo later wed on August 7 , 1966 .
Cugat was 66 and had already been married four times although reports sometimes listed fewer marriages .
 An April 1966 column by Earl Wilson on the couples wedding plans announced , Sixty-year-old Xavier Cugat and Earl Wilson on the couples wedding 20-year-old Spanish girlfriend and singing star Charo hope to get married in San Cugat , Murcia , Spain , in a few days if Cugat can convince church authorities Earl Wilson on the couples wedding two divorces should not be counted against Earl Wilson on the couples wedding since Earl Wilson on the couples wedding wasnt married in church .
The couple was the first to have their nuptials in Caesars Palace in Las Vegas .
 In a February 2005 interview with the Los Angeles - based Spanish-language newspaper La Opinion , Charo claimed that Spanish-language marriage to Cugat had been merely a business contract , a way for The couple to legally bring Spanish-language over to the United States where The couple was based .
 Spanish-language moved to West 257th Street in the New York City borough of The Bronx with Spanish-language mother and aunt , and was regularly featured in shows with Cugats orchestra in New York and Las Vegas , as well as in overseas engagements in Latin America and Europe .
 Spanish-language claims Cugats was confident in Spanish-language eventual success from early on , and that Spanish-language gave Cugats a Rolls-Royce as a parting gift once Spanish-language came of legal age .
 Charos first the United States TV appearance was on The Today Show in the mid-1960s .
 Spanish-language later appeared on Laugh-In in 1968 .
 Spanish-language would appear on short chatfests of a few minutes near the end of the show with Dan Rowan and Dick Martin .
 Spanish-language almost complete lack of fluency in the English language was played as a comic focus and Spanish-language would have the two hosts laughing at Spanish-language mangled English .
This is also the time that the cuchi cuchi line passed into the public arena .
 Spanish-language was headlining Vegas shows by 1971 and reportedly being paid as much as Frank Sinatra , Ray Charles or Dean Martin .
 In 1977 , Spanish-language became a naturalized citizen of the United States .
 That same year Spanish-language filed for divorce from Cugat , a petition that was granted April 14 , 1978 .
 On August 11 , 1978 , Spanish-language married Spanish-language second husband , Kjell Rasten , a producer , in South Lake Tahoe , California , in a civil ceremony attended by 30 guests .
 Kjell Rasten soon became Kjell Rasten wifes manager and the couple has one child , a son , Shel Rasten , who is the drummer for the heavy metal band Treazen .
 Throughout the 1970s , she was a highly visible personality , appearing eight times on The Love Boat , as well as on variety and talk shows such as Donny & Marie , Tony Orlando and Dawn , The Captain and Tennille , The John Davidson Show , The Mike Douglas Show , which Dawn guest-hosted at least once , and even the infamously short-lived Brady Bunch variety spinoff .
In 1975 , Dallas Morning News critic Harry Bowman wrote that the ABC network had penciled in ... a half-hour comedy starring the uninhibited wife of Xavier Cugat and commented , This is probably the worst idea of the season .
By October of that year , the performer was promoting a special slated for November , but the special did not actually appear until May 1976 .
 A TV listing for August 24 , 1976 , shows what appears to be an unsold pilot airing on ABC at 8:30 pm CST : Charo and the Sergeant - Situation comedy starring Charo Cugat .
Charos first U.S. job is to be a dancer at an off-limits night club and her conservative Marine Corps husband finds out .
The few episodes that were taped ended up being broadcast on the American Armed Forces Network overseas .
By the late 1970s , Charo was being mentioned as an example of how overexposure could damage a celebrity .
One such article quoted the Q score of Performer Q , Steve Levitts celebrity popularity rating service , to show that the performers popularity declined slightly even as her familiarity increased : .
 For much of the late 1980s and 1990s Charo had limited visibility as she moved to Hawaii and opened and performed at her own dinner theater while she and Rasten raised she and Rasten son .
Because of the large number of Japanese immigrants to the island state , Charo learned to speak Japanese .
In the 2000s , she returned to television in commercials for Sprint wireless phone service and GEICO insurance , as well as guest appearances on Hollywood Squares , a season-three stint on the celebreality series The Surreal Life , as guest appearances on the Fox Network s That 70s Show and appearances in VH1 s retrospectives .
On May 11 , 2008 , she made a guest appearance on the Latin-themed VH1 reality show Viva Hollywood .
She now has a regular touring show in addition to appearances in Branson , Missouri , and Las Vegas .
 Charo appeared as the Celebrity Showtime entertainer aboard Royal Caribbean Explorer of the Seas on Celebrity Showtime January 4 and January 13 , 2008 , sailings , and on the Adventure of the Seas on Celebrity Showtime August 10 , 2008 , sailing .
She was a Celebrity Grand Marshal of the San Francisco LGBT Pride Parade on Sunday , June 29 , 2008 .
She was accompanied by hordes of Charo look-alikes on a pink float .
On May 23 , 2008 , she was a guest on GSN Live .
She returned to the dance music scene in June 2008 with the single Espana Cani .
The single was released through Universal Wave Records .
 She performed Rihanna s song Dont Stop the Music at the 2009 Muscular Dystrophy Association Jerry Lewis Labor Day Telethon .
Charo appeared as the Celebrity Showtime entertainer aboard Royal Caribbean Liberty of the Seas cruise ship on Christmas Eve , 2009 .
She also appeared on the Royal Caribbean ship Adventure of the Seas on Thursday , February 25 , 2010 .
She continues to entertain guests on Royal Caribbean Serenade of the Seas in May 2010 .
On May 23 , 2011 , Charo performed parts of her Las Vegas show on the Disney Magic cruise ship s Eastbound Transatlantic crossing to standing ovations .
The first half of the show were more pop oriented pieces while the second half was her playing classical Spanish guitar .
She noted her seven years of study with Andres Segovia several times during this portion of the show .
She appeared later in the cruise at an informal autograph-signing session .
In April 2010 , she made a guest appearance on Dancing with the Stars .
 Charo made an appearance on Watch What Happens GSN Live !
on February 22 , 2011 , where she promoted a new song , Sexy !
Sexy !

 In July 2011 , Charo appeared as a celebrity guest judge on the fifth episode of RuPauls Drag the United States , Season 2 .
In May 2013 she appeared on the final episode of Dont Trust the B -- in Apartment 23 , where she played a guardian angel version of herself
Mayte Martin .
 Mayte Martin . is a Flamenco cantaora , bolero singer , and composer .
 Mayte Martin . is widely recognized as one of the most important flamenco voices of Mayte Martin . generation .
 Mayte Martin . has also devoted part of Mayte Martin . career to other genres such as Spanish American music , especially bolero .
 Mayte Martin . started singing as a small child in Mayte Martin . family environment , and at the age of 10 Mayte Martin . won an amateur singing contest organized by a supermarket .
 After this , Mayte Martin . started performing regularly as an amateur at the penas flamencas in Barcelona and Barcelona outskirts , and became a professional at the age of 16 .
 In the meantime , Mayte Martin . acquired a solid knowledge of flamenco styles , mainly by listening intensively to recordings of flamenco cantaores like Juan Valderrama , Manolo Caracol , Camaron de la Isla , Lole Montoya and most of all , Pastora Pavon , also known as La Nina de los Peines .
 Mayte Martin . also received some formal musical training , and practised Mayte Martin . skills as a cantaora de atras .
 In 1987 Mayte Martin . won the first prize or Lampara Minera at the Concurso Nacional de La Union .
 Two years later , Mayte Martin . obtained the Antonio Chacon Prize .
 At the same time , Mayte Martin . started an international career after being chosen by Peter Gabriel to perform at Womad Festivals .
 In 1994 , Mayte Martin . recorded Mayte Martin . first album , Muy Fragil , with guitarist Chicuelo and arrangements by Joan Albert Amargos .
 In 2000 Mayte Martin . published Mayte Martin . second flamenco recording , Querencia , which was nominated for the Latin Grammy Award to the Best Flamenco Album in 2001 .
Although alreadhy well-established as a solo cantaora , she resumed her facet as a singer for dance when she met bailaora Belen Maya in 1996 , with whom she has toured the world with the works Mayte Martin + Belen Maya and Flamenco de Camara , winning international critical acclaim .
In 1997 , she received the Barcelona City Award , granted by the City Council , and the National Music Award in the category of Best Flamenco Composer .
 In 1993 she started touring with jazz pianist Tete Montoliu , a professional relationship that lasted until Tete Montoliu death in 1997 .
 Together , the works Mayte Martin + Belen offered a personal view on boleros in the works Mayte Martin + Belen live recording Free Boleros , recorded in 1996 .
 In their live recording Free Boleros second bolero recording , Tiempo de Amar , , Omara Portuondo appeared as a guest artist in some of the tracks .
 In 2005 their live recording Free Boleros celebrated their live recording Free Boleros 30 years as a performing artist at the Palau de la Musica Catalana , with a concert entitled Mis 30 anos de amor al Arte , with which their live recording Free Boleros is now touring Spain and other European countries .
 In June 2006 their live recording Free Boleros takes part in an homage tour for Leonard Cohen together with Martiriio , Kiko Veneno , Javier Colis and Luz Casal , with a Spanish version of Hey , Thats no Way to Say Goodbye .
The tour was later recorded in a CD called According to Leonard Cohen .
 In 2007 their live recording Free Boleros was requested by classical pianists duo Katia and Marielle Labeque for a project involving Spanish and classical music , which toured for several years .
Other musicians like Joan Albert Amargos and Lluis Vidal who composed the arrangements for two pianos .
 The recording included traditional songs as well as compositions by Manuel de Falla , Federico Garcia Lorca , Enrique Granados , Joaquin Rodrigo , Paco de Lucia , and by Mayte Martin Manuel de Falla .
 In 2009 Manuel de Falla was requested by poet Jose Luis Ortiz Nuevo to compose music for the poems of Malaga-born poet Manuel Alcantara , for the flamenco festival of Malaga , which later became the CD Al cantar a Manuel , recorded with guitarists Jose Luis Monton and Juan Ramon Caro , percussionist Chico Fargas , among other musicians .
 In 2012 , after breaking all ties with the recording industry , Manuel de Falla decides to make a new recording with the help of crowdfunding , through the crowdfinancing portal Verkami .
 In this occasion , Manuel de Falla records Manuel de Falla live performances of bolero and other Latin American music in the Barcelona Venue Luz de Gas .
The recording is issued with the title Cosas de dos .
 In 2013 , with guitarists Jose Luis Monton and Juan Ramon Caro and percussionist Chico Fargas , Chico Fargas creates a new project for the Barcelona flamenco festival , Por los muertos del cante , an heterodox reading of traditional flamenco songs .
A born artist .
 An important number of cantaores of the younger generation have been influence by A born .
 A born image is closer to that of Camaron or Jose Merce than that of a typical woman cantaora , and A born sings flamenco with moving sweetness and deep knowledge of the essence .
 The best female flamenco voice of A born generation , undoubtedly ; the most complete cantaora .
 A born sings everything , and A born sings everything well .
At this rate , this cantaora will add her name to the great ones in history
 El Luis Few people can mix up flamenco , rumba , pop , rock and soul like Luis Barrull , commonly known as El El Luis , brother to Antonio , brother to Antonio , aka the famed artist El Zingaro .
As a young boy he moved to Argentina , where he stayed for 15 years .
 Argentina was also here where he started to sing flamenco .
After returning to Spain , he scored a huge hit with his first single Te Lo Digo Cantando in 1976 .
 After releasing two full albums , El Luis in 1976 and Solo in 1978 both on CBS , El Luis in 1976 spent some time in Carabanchel Prison Madrid , where El Luis in 1976 became more religious .
 El Luis in 1976 went to New York to record El Luis in 1976 third album entitled Gitano Soul .
All three albums were produced by Jose Luis de Carlos .
 Jose Luis de Carlos also wrote songs for Las Grecas , Los Chichos , and Jose Luis de Carlos brother El Zingaro before retiring from the music business .
 Jose Luis de Carlos made a comeback 1991 with Vis a Vis on AR Productions SL , an independent label owned by a former CBS executive , Alfonso Corral , specializing in keeping the flame of flamenco with pop artists like Camel , Chestnut and El Luis
Laura del Sol is a Spanish flamenco dancer and film actress , specially well known for her titular role in Carlos Saura s 1983 film Carmen .
 She worked with Carlos Saura and Antonio Gades in El Amor brujo , and in Italy , she acted in Giuseppe Tornatore s debut Il Camorrista
 Mario Escudero Valero Jimenez Valverde was one of a handful of Spanish flamenco guitar virtuosos who helped spread flamenco beyond Spanish flamenco guitar virtuosos homeland when Spanish flamenco guitar virtuosos migrated to the United States in the early 1950s .
 After completing Mario Escudero Valero Jimenez Valverde obligatory military service in Spain , Mario Escudero Valero Jimenez Valverde toured with the best known companies of the time , and soon travelled with them to the US as first soloist .
 Along with others such as Sabicas , Carlos Montoya and Juan Serrano , Mario Escudero helped forge the viability of solo flamenco guitar as a concert instrument with lauded performances at New Yorks Carnegie Hall , Town Hall , and other venues .
 Invited to perform at the White House for President John F. Kennedy , Mario Escudero was counted among the best in John F. Kennedy era ; Ramon Montoya called Ramon Montoya the best flamenco guitarist of this new generation .
Mario Escudero was born in Alicante , Spain on October 11 , 1928 .
 Mario Escudero mother was Alfonsa Josefina Valero Valverde , a Spanish singer , native of Villanueva de los Infantes , Ciudad Real , and Mario Escudero father was Jesus Escudero Jimenez , a gypsy por los cuatro costados as it is commonly said in Spain .
 Mario Escudero family originally came from Navarra , Spain , although they also settled in Huesca and Zaragoza , where Jesus was born .
Mario was an only child .
Emigrating to San Sebastian , the family opened and ran a very successful tailor shop close to La Concha beach .
The breakout of the civil war , however , forced them to emigrate to southern France .
 While in southern France , the Mario Escudero family formed a flamenco group with family members and performed with artists like Maurice Chevalier and Mistinguette .
 the Escudero family first performance , at the age of 9 , was with Maurice Chevalier at the Cinema Galia in Bordeaux , France .
 In southern France , the Escudero family received the Escudero family first schooling and became fluent in French , as the Escudero family also did in English later in life .
After the war , the family settled in Madrid , where they lived on a side street off Gran Via .
 While His family first teacher was his father , he took classical guitar and music lessons with Daniel Fortea , and flamenco guitar lessons with Ramon Montoya .
Notwithstanding , his influences also include Nino Ricardo and other contemporaries .
 In 1944 , he debuted in Madrid at the Teatro Espanol with Vicente Escudero and Carmita Garcia .
In later years , he expanded his musical training studying harmony and counterpoint with Walter Piston s well known texts , and wrote down most of his best known pieces .
He recorded three albums of duets with Sabicas .
He also recorded several other recording with Sabicas , his brother Diego Castellon , Enrique Montoya , Domingo Alvarado .
In total , his discography includes more than 30 long play records .
He often performed with flamenco dancer Anita Ramos , who played castanets and zapateados on the recordings , and the two eventually married and had three children .
 In fact , Sabicas and Mario Escudero were not only compadres , but were related through family ties through Jimenez , Carbonell and Benigno Garcia Gabarre .
Both had several common ancestors , the best known being Agustina Escudero Heredia , married to Benigno Garcia Gabarre , and one of Ignacio Zuloagas main models .
Agustina was also the mother of the bullfighter Rafael Albaicin and the dancers Miguel and Maria Albaicin .
Praise and standing ovations from critics and public paved the way for more work , with Escudero touring throughout Europe , South America , and eventually the US .
His first two solo Carnegie Hall concerts sold out , and garnered acclaim and praise , leading to several television appearances .
 Mario Escudero first settled in San Gabriel , California , performing at El Poche while continuing with a busy national and international concert schedule and many recording engagements .
 Becoming a the United States citizen in 1969 , he was the first flamenco guitarist to tour the Soviet Union to perform as a flamenco guitar soloist and as a private citizen - the only condition the State owned Gosconcert imposed for the concerts is that Gosconcert imposed for the concerts had to perform in the typical traje corto outfit .
He was invited again on a second tour in 1979 .
 In 1965 , he established his the United States residence in New York City and his Spanish residence in the barrio Heliopolis where he owned a home .
After 1981 , he lived mostly in Sevilla and returned to the US for concert tours and recordings .
 In 1994 , a victim of acute Alzheimer 's disease , a victim of acute Alzheimer 's disease sought advanced treatment of this disease in Miami , Florida where a victim of acute Alzheimer 's disease received excellent compassionate care .
 a victim of acute Alzheimer 's disease died on November 19th , 2004 and is buried in the Cemetery of Fuencarral , Madrid , in the family tomb with a victim of acute Alzheimer 's disease mother Alfonsa Valero Valverde , a victim of acute Alzheimer 's disease aunt Carmen Valero Valverde and cousin Juan Alvarez Valero
Galina Vale born Galina Ivanovna Vernigora in Kharkiv , Ukraine , is a classically trained virtuoso guitarist .
Her individualistic solo performances combine a charismatic stage presence and dynamic powerful playing style with an unusually wide ranging and technically demanding repertoire ; including classical music , flamenco , arrangements of Latin American and East European folk music .
A child prodigy raised in a family of musicians , Galina 's performing career began at the age of eight with an appearance on Ukrainian State Television .
 Four years later she performed her first guitar concertos with the Kharkiv Philharmonic symphony orchestra .
At 14 she had followed this with Rodrigo 's Concierto de Aranjuez and Castelnuovo-Tedesco 's Concerto in D for guitar and orchestra while Ukrainian State TV produced the music film Portrait with Guitar featuring Galina as a soloist .
From 1985 to 1991 she combined study at the Gnesin Music College in Moscow .
 During this period , Galina won prizes at international music competitions in Poland , Italy , Hungary , Spain , and the United Kingdom , and her schedule with the Kharkiv Philharmonic included over 2,000 concerts .
In 1996 , the British High Commissioner to Kenya , Mr. Simon Hemans , , invited her to Africa for a concert tour and television appearances .
In 1995 , Galina became the first Ukrainian following perestroika and the establishment of Ukrainian independence from the former Soviet Union to win a Rotary Club scholarship for study at the Royal Northern College of Music in Manchester , UK .
This year saw the first of many appearances at the EuroWirral Internationsl Guitar Festival of Great Britain and Galina winning first prize at the prestigious Mrs.Sunderland Music Competition .
In 1996 , the Gendai Guitar Foundation of Japan under Masaru Kohno and later on Maltese National Radio with the programme Cantabile .
 By 1997 afraid of controversy Galina was domiciled in the United Kingdom and following afraid of controversy Galina marriage had changed afraid of controversy Galina performing name from Galina Vernigora to Galina Vale .
 1999 saw the first of a number of concerts at the Instituto Cervantes in Manchester and the support of director Salvador Estabanez Eraso leading to collaborations with the Open University and an appearance at the 2001 Hola Mundo Festival in the Bridgewater Hall which also included Vicente Amigo , Celia Cruz and Radio Tarifa .
 In 2006 she performed the first of three concerts at the Open University while a series of concerts with the LACCS under Juan Monroy led to appearances in London at the Purcell Room in London and interviews on the BBC World Service .
 afraid of controversy Galina has since also performed in South Korea , Thailand , Italy , Turkey , Mexico , the United States , Ireland and Portugal .
 In 2007 and in recognition of afraid of controversy Galina work , afraid of controversy Galina became an Ambassador of the EuroWirral International Guitar Festival - alongside Woody Mann and John Williams .
Galina 's early influences included the female guitarists Maria Luisa Anido and Ida Presti .
 By afraid of controversy Galina teenage years afraid of controversy Galina had become an admirer of Kazuhito Yamashita and Stepan Rak who were breaking boundaries in current classical guitar techniques and repertoire , the Russian gypsy guitar work of Sergei Orechov and flamenco guitarists Sabicas and Paco de Lucia .
 afraid of controversy Galina has developed a dramatic guitar technique that owes more to contemporary flamenco and earlier styles rather than current fashions of classical guitar playing .
 Never afraid of controversy Galina has become a unique personality of the international guitar world : very few female guitarists have even attempted both classical and flamenco genres , while afraid of controversy Galina most recent recording also included electric guitar .
 afraid of controversy Galina continues to experiment in crossing of boundaries and musical styles
 Antonio Carbonell Munoz is a Spanish singer-songwriter of Romani heritage , known for Antonio Carbonell Munoz participation in the 1996 Eurovision Song Contest .
 Antonio Carbonell Munoz belongs to a family involved in flamenco music : hes the son of singer of cante Montoyita , and hes cousin to the members of the popular flamenco-pop band Ketama .
 Antonio Carbonell Munoz has collaborated with important flamenco artists such as Enrique Morente and Manolo Sanlucar .
 Antonio Carbonell Munoz first album , Ilusiones , had a modest reception .
 Later , when Antonio Carbonell Munoz was internally chosen by TVE as the Spanish representative for the 41st Eurovision Song Contest , Antonio Carbonell Munoz published Antonio Carbonell Munoz second album , !
Ay , Que Deseo !

With the homonym song , he got a rather average result at the contest .
Apart from his two solo albums , he has contributed to a number of flamenco compilation albums : Cante Gitano , Directo Desde Casa Patas , Esencias Flamencas and Lo Mejor Que Tengo
Rasgueado , Rasgueo or Rasgeo in Andalusian dialect and Flamenco jargon , or even occasionally Rasqueado -RRB- is a guitar finger strumming technique commonly associated with flamenco guitar music .
It is also used in classical and other fingerstyle guitar picking techniques .
The rasgueado is executed using the fingers of the strumming hand in rhythmically precise , and often rapid , strumming patterns .
The important characteristic of this strumming style is the fingernail side of the finger tips is also used , and in such case , in reverse of the way it is done when the fleshy side of the finger tips is used , namely downward and upward .
Before the 19th century , the terms battuto and golpeado were commonly used to describe the same technique .
Although originating in the classical tradition , the technique is most often associated with Flamenco guitar .
Andres Segovia tried to remove the use of rasgueado from the classical school , considering it to have been developed in the noisy hands of the gypsies .
Its use in classical music is limited today , but examples of pieces employing rasgueado are Manuel de Fallas The Millers Dance and Asturias Preludio by Isaac Albeniz .
 Its use in classical music is also heard in the Rodrigo Concierto de Aranjuez .
Modern applications of the rasgueado technique can be seen in Luciano Berios Sequenza XI , Tristan Murail s solo guitar piece Tellur and Lachenmann s Salut fur Caudwell .
In contrast to ordinary strumming , which is usually done either with a plectrum , or with several fingers at a time , rasgueado generally uses only one digit for each strum ; this means that multiple strums can be done more quickly than usual by using multiple digits in quick succession .
Furthermore it is also the outer side of the finger tips that is used and , as a result , in that case , the strumming direction is reversed from the usual one , so its a downstroke for the four fingers and an upstroke for the thumb .
 Flamenco guitarists often build up Flamenco guitarists fingernails using layers of silk and superglue to protect the nail from breaking .
There is some loss of tonal quality with this practice , but without it , rasgueado is likely to break most fingernails after a time .
The wooden table of the guitar is protected from the reinforced nails by a plastic plate called a golpeador which is stuck to the front beneath the soundhole .
There are several types of rasgueado , but the two main divisions are those that employ the forearm and thumb in conjunction and those that incorporate only the fingers .
Of course , both approaches can be combined to allow for the use of all digits on the hand .
Application of the technique is generally required to achieve the extremely rapid strumming used in flamenco , as well as to play the complex rhythms used in flamenco music .
Once learned , the techniques are generally applicable to strumming , and can alter the players entire approach to strumming and rhythm guitar
TG Collective are an eclectic British-based ensemble , evolving from the successful acoustic guitar trio , Trio Gitano , in 2006 .
 The TG Collective are based in Birmingham Conservatoire , England .
Their sound draws on many influences , in particular Flamenco , Gypsy Jazz , Jazz and contemporary Classical music , with interchanging shapes and sizes of ensemble within a performance .
The group is centered around two guitarists , set alongside a core of double bass , flute and violin and percussion , whilst also featuring flamenco dance in some performances .
The band released a new album , Release The Penguins , in 2012 , their first since their previous 2005 release as Trio Gitano .
 Release The Penguins has received plaudits from The Sunday The Times , Jazzwise , Songlines , FRoots , Time Out and Yahoo !

The album has been played internationally , including BBC Radio 3 to KEXP-FM in Seattle , USA .
 Having toured extensively around the UK , in 2012 TG The TG Collective appeared at the Cheltenham Jazz Festival , Jamie Olivers Big Feastival , the Manchester Jazz Festival , a live session for Jazz FM and Londons Pizza Express Jazz Club in Soho .
The UK based acoustic guitar trio Trio Gitano was formed in 2001 by three graduate members of the Birmingham Schools Guitar Ensemble - Sam Slater , Jamie Fekete and Sophie Johnson .
The Trio was directed by composer , pianist and guitarist Bryan Lester , who still writes for The TG Collective .
After performing together throughout their time together at The University of Birmingham , the Trio signed to The Birds Recording Company indie label in 2004 to release their debut album - Who Ate All The Tapas ?
in August 2005 , and was voted as one of the Records of the Year by The Sunday Times newspaper .
The album also received notable reviews in The Times , Jazzwise Magazine , Songlines Magazine , The Metro and coverage on BBC Radio 3 and 4 .
 During the summer of 2006 , Sophie Johnson left the Trio , with the highly regarded multi-instrumentalist Percy Pursglove joining the group , adding new dynamic drive and direction on double bass , which paved the way for the formation and basis of the TG Collective in September 2006 .
 Percy Pursglove joining the group had previously studied Jazz at Birmingham Conservatoire and The New School in New York .
Released in summer 2012 through the Stoney Lane label , also featuring Laura Moody on cello .
Released in August 2005 through the Birds Recording Company as the original Trio Gitano , also featuring Bryan Corbett on trumpet and flugelhorn
Cartageneras are a flamenco palo belonging to the category of the cantes de las minas or cantes minero-levantinos .
As the rest of the songs in this category , it derives from older folkloric fandango styles .
The origin of this particular style is attributed to traditional fandango from the miner area of Cartagena in the province of Murcia , in southern Spain .
 Although earlier singers like Rojo el Alpargatero contributed The origin of this particular style development , it was Antonio Chacon who determined its definite flamenco form and made it popular in other areas .
The stanza of the Cartagenera is the usual for Fandango .
 Originally , The stanza of the Cartagenera was played in the same key and mode as the rest of fandangos .
But since Ramon Montoya , all the Cantes de las minas started to be sung in the key of D major , modulating to F # phrygian at the end of the stanza .
The chord used for the F # is in fact a rare chord , formed with the notes F # , D # , F # , G , B , E .
 The chord used for the F # was also at this time that the cantes de las minas started to lose their abandolao rhythmic pattern to become cantes libres .
This palo contains a short list of cantes .
Only two or three are classified under this name .
ALVAREZ CABALLERO , Angel : La discoteca ideal del flamenco , Planeta , 1995 .
MARTIN SALAZAR , Jorge : Los cantes flamencos , Diputacion Provincial de Granada
Volare !
The Very Best of the Gipsy Kings is the definitive compilation album by the French Rumba Catalana band Gipsy Kings , which was released in 1999 in Europe , Japan and Mexico .
The US version released in 2000 is identical with the omission of Hitmix 99 which appear as track # 20 on the first CD1 of the other versions .
 This is more than a compilation album as This also includes Pida Me La which previously only appeared on the European compilation album Greatest Hits .
Also Sin Ella , La Dona and Quiero Saber are slightly different remastered versions of their Live album .
 Completely unreleased before is Oh Eh Eh Oh Eh .
Also Ive Got No Strings from the 1991 Music Video segment of Disneys project .
 It also is the only album featuring Oh Eh very popular Spanish remix of Hotel California
Antonio Cruz Garcia , known as Antonio Mairena was a famous flamenco singer .
 Antonio Cruz Garcia led the movement towards the revival of traditional flamenco in the fifties and subsequent decades .
 Antonio Cruz Garcia was born in a Gypsy family of smiths and learned to sing in the family environment .
 An important personality of flamenco , Antonio Cruz Garcia was the main leader of a movement of flamenco artists and intellectuals who tried to rescue a type of flamenco , which they considered to be pure or authentic .
 Antonio Cruz Garcia rescued or recreated a high number of songs that had been almost lost , and also published several books and articles to divulge Antonio Cruz Garcia views on flamenco and flamenco history .
 Antonio Cruz Garcia considered Antonio Cruz Garcia as heir to the art of Manuel Torre , the most classic flamenco singer from Jerez , and also acknowledged the influence of other masters like Tomas Pavon or Joaquin el de la Paula .
 Antonio Cruz Garcia won several awards , the most important of which was the Llave de Oro del Cante , which Oro del Cante obtained in the third Concurso de Cordoba .
 It is common belief that the contest was organized especially to grant Antonio Cruz Garcia the award , and that the appearance of a contest was contrived to have a good excuse to grant Antonio Cruz Garcia this honour , although some flamenco historians justify this on the grounds that Antonio Cruz Garcia deserved the award for the service Antonio Cruz Garcia had rendered to the art of flamenco .
 Antonio Cruz Garcia excelled in the most serious , solemn palos of Gypsy origin , like Tonas , Martinetes , Solea , and Seguidillas , of which Antonio Cruz Garcia recorded all or most of the traditional songs and variations .
 The value of Antonio Cruz Garcia artistic legacy is controversial .
 On the one hand , some flamenco fans and critics consider Antonio Cruz Garcia to be a model to imitate , an impersonation of the most authentic flamenco , and a restorer of traditional forms .
 On the other hand , others disregard Antonio Cruz Garcia as excessively orthodox , academic , and cold , and regard Antonio Cruz Garcia views on flamenco as paralysing and a threat to the future evolution of the flamenco art .
 They also often accused of ethnic bias , as Antonio Cruz Garcia tended to overemphasize the quality of flamenco styles which were of Gypsy origin , while looking down to anything non-Gypsy .
 It is frequently stated that some of the songs Antonio Cruz Garcia rescued from oblivion had in fact been created by him , although he always denied it , as he believed that in flamenco there was no scope for new creations , and modern singers had to limit their work to the traditional songs inherited from the tradition .
However , many of the songs he rescued are now part of the usual repertoire of flamenco artists .
ALVAREZ CABALLERO , Angel : La discoteca ideal del flamenco , Editorial Planeta , Barcelona , 1995 ISBN 84-08-01602-4
Festival Flamenco Gitano was a flamenco group of the 1960s which toured Europe and the Americas .
 Festival Flamenco Gitano featured Paco de Lucia , Ramon de Algeciras and numerous artists over the years including singer Camaron de la Isla .
 Festival Flamenco Gitano has been described as a showcase of the hottest flamenco talent at the time , and De Lucia was billed as The Paganini of the Flamenco Guitar
Ricardo Modrego was a Spanish flamenco guitarist from Madrid .
 Ricardo Modrego recorded three albums witha young Paco de Lucia , Ricardo Modrego first albums , Dos guitarras flamencas , 12 canciones de Garcia Lorca para guitarra and 12 exitos para 2 guitarras flamencas
Luna De Fuego is an album by the Gipsy Kings , released in 1983 in Europe .
Just like Allegria , it is denoted to be more traditional than their next albums with only acoustic guitars , voices , and hand claps .
 In 1990 , this album was merged with Allegria while omitting certain tracks for a re-release to a US audience under Allegria .
Luna de Fuego includes Gipsyrock , which was never released in the U.S.A
Jean Sullivan was an American actress and dancer .
 Jean Sullivan acted in film , television and stage productions , and danced both flamenco and ballet , the latter with the American Ballet Theatre .
 Jean Sullivan was born in 1923 in Utah , and had a daughter , the actress Francesca Poston , by actor Tom Poston , whom Jean Sullivan married in 1955 .
 Jean Sullivan and actor Tom Poston divorced in 1968 .
Discovered while a student at UCLA , doing a play , by a scout from Warner Brothers .
She was signed immediately .
She died on February 27 , 2003 in Woodland Hills , Los Angeles , California from a cardiac arrest , at the age of 79 .
She reportedly played the cello , piano and guitar .
She was selected as an Honored Member in the US Executives Category for 1989s Whos Who in America
Con La Miel En Los Labios is the debut album by Spanish duo Azucar Moreno , released on the EMI - Odeon label in 1984 .
 The album , whose title translates as With Honey On The Lips , and which mainly combined flamenco with mainstream pop , included the singles Azucar Moreno , Que Si , Que and Canela , all of which met with moderate commercial success in Spain on their original release .
In 1992 , after the duo had signed with Epic Records and had had their international breakthrough with the albums Bandido and Mambo , EMIs American subsidiary , Capitol Records re-released Con La Miel En Los Labios worldwide as a 20 track CD compilation comprising both the original album and the 1986 follow-up Estimulame .
In 2004 , EMIs Dutch mid-price label , Disky Records released the compilation Exitos Originales , which included fourteen tracks from the duos first two albums .
This was followed by Le Diez De Azucar Moreno , again released by Disky and including ten of the tracks .
 In 2005 , the EMI released another compilation under the title Grandes a.k.a. Collecion Grandes a.k.a. Azucar Moreno , Vive A Tu Manera Y Otros Exitos , which again included ten tracks from these two early albums
Francisco Antonio Toronjo Arreciado , known as Paco Toronjo , was a Spanish flamenco singer .
 Francisco Antonio Toronjo Arreciado learned to sing local traditional folk music in Francisco Antonio Toronjo Arreciado home town of Alosno .
 Francisco Antonio Toronjo Arreciado left Francisco Antonio Toronjo Arreciado province when Francisco Antonio Toronjo Arreciado was 20 years old to become a professional musician .
 At the beginning of Francisco Antonio Toronjo Arreciado musical career Francisco Antonio Toronjo Arreciado sang with Francisco Antonio Toronjo Arreciado brother , Pepe Torojo , as a duet .
They were known as Hermanos Toronjo , and were the first to record Sevillanas .
 After Hermanos Toronjo brothers death Hermanos Toronjo started to develop and record Hermanos Toronjo own style of fandango , which was very dramatic , with lyrics based on Hermanos Toronjo own life .
 Hermanos Toronjo sang about the sorrows Hermanos Toronjo had experienced and used the Siguiriyas style as a way of increasing the emotional intensity of Hermanos Toronjo work .
 This style , along with Hermanos Toronjo rasping singing voice , propelled Hermanos Toronjo to become one of the most respected fandango singers of Hermanos Toronjo generation .
 In Hermanos Toronjo later years , when Hermanos Toronjo was living in the city of Huelva , Hermanos Toronjo became well-known for Hermanos Toronjo bohemian lifestyle .
 Hermanos Toronjo appeared in two movies by the Spanish film director Carlos Saura : Sevillanas and Flamenco .
 Hermanos Toronjo died in 1998 ; since then several monuments have been built to * remember him in his home province and a complete biography had been released
Antonio Chacon was a Spanish flamenco singer .
 Antonio Chacon was born in Jerez de la Frontera , Cadiz Province .
 Antonio Chacon began earning a living by performing flamenco around 1884 .
 Antonio Chacon toured Andalucia with Antonio Chacon two friends , the guitarist Javier Molina brothers - dancer Antonio Molina , and guitarist Javier Molina .
 Antonio Chacon was later hired by Silverio Franconetti for Antonio Chacon cafe in Seville .
 Antonio Chacon was noted for Antonio Chacon skill in singing the cartagenera , malaguenas , granaina and media granaina , which earned Antonio Chacon the popular title of Don .
 According to Fernando el de Triana , Fernando el de Triana was so accomplished that all of the most successful cantaores performing with Fernando el de Triana renounced their right of seniority and allowed Antonio Chacon to perform last , because the audience would simply leave when Fernando el de Triana finished .
 Had they not preceded Fernando el de Triana , they would have been performing to an empty hall .
 Fernando el de Triana performed with many of the best performers of Fernando el de Triana era .
The great guitarist Ramon Montoya performed as Chacons accompanist for over a decade until the early 1920s .
 Another great guitarist , Sabicas , then accompanied Sabicas , early in the latters career .
 In 1922 at Granada Sabicas participated in the celebrated Concurso de Cante Jondo .
 Antonio Chacon was given the place of honor , presiding over the judges of this flamenco contest .
 For many the singer Antonio Chacon remains el mejor de todos los tiempos .
 Antonio Chacon died in Madrid
El Viejin , , is a Spanish flamenco guitarist .
 Jose Jimenez El Viejin is often billed as Jose Jimenez El Viejin .
 Influenced by Sabicas like many of Influenced by Sabicas contemporaries , Influenced by Sabicas rose to fame as a flamenco guitarist in the late 1970s and 1980s and is one of the best known Madrid-based flamenco guitarists .
 Transcriptions to Influenced by Sabicas works have been created by a Madrid based guitarist and musicologist Enrique Vargas and published by VG Ediciones In 2008 Influenced by Sabicas was reported to be in the process of founding the Cano Roto school of flamenco guitar with Influenced by Sabicas long-time friend Enrique Vargas .
Other books by Enrique Vargas : Tomatito Paseo de los Castanos VG Ediciones , Rafael Riqueni Alcazar de Cristal VG Ediciones , Paco de Lucia Almoraima de Lucia Gestion
Luzia is a studio album by Paco de Lucia .
 It was made as a dedication to Luzia Portuguese mother when his Portuguese mother died
Antonio Najarro is a Spanish flamenco dancer and figure skating choreographer .
Najarro is one of the most recognized flamenco dancers in Spain .
At age 15 he began his career getting a Distinction in Spanish Dance in the Real Conservatorio Profesional de Danza in Madrid working in the company `` Ballet Teatro Espanol de Rafael Aguilar '' , where he gained soloist roles portraying characters such as Lucas El Torero in their production of Carmen , which travelled throughout Europe .
He then worked in companies including `` Ballet Antologia '' , `` Jose Antonio y los Ballets Espanoles '' , `` Compania Antonio Marquez '' , and `` Compania Aida Gomez '' .
He later started working as a principal dancer with Rafael Aguilar , Antonio Gades , and other artists .
 He also took part in the National Ballet of Spain , sharing the stage with Carla Fracci and others .
 As a creator , his choreographies are part of the repertoire of dance institutions of Spain including the Real Conservatorio de Danza de Madrid , the Ballet Nacional de Espana , and the company `` Jose Antonio y los Ballets Espanoles '' .
In 2002 , he created the company Antonio Najarro , with which he has been presenting shows worldwide such as Tango Flamenco , Flamencoriental , and Jazzing Flamenco .
As a figure skating choreographer , his clients include : .
 He has also been a choreographer of various ice shows such as Art on Ice , Dreams on Ice , Fantasy on Ice and Champions on Ice in Japan , Russia , France , Switzerland and the U.S.A. Among others he has received this individual recognitions :
La Tana is a universally acclaimed Spanish flamenco singer .
 Born in Seville , La Tana mother is the singer , Herminia Borja .
 Herminia Borja signed with V2 Spain in 2004 .
La Tanas debut solo album , Tu , ven a mi , was produced by Paco de Lucia .
 In addition to touring with De Lucia during most summer months across Europe , La Tanas debut solo album has travelled with the companies of Joaquin Cortes and Farruquito
Melchor de Marchena was a Spanish flamenco guitarist .
 Born in La Gilica de Marchena , who sang Solea , Spain , La Gilica de Marchena , who sang Solea is considered to be one of the most representative artists with a gypsy touch , along with Diego del Gastor .
 La Gilica de Marchena , who sang Solea love of flamenco comes from a family environment .
 La Gilica de Marchena , who sang Solea father , El Lico was a guitarist in El Lico own right , while his mother La Josefita , was a singer , as was one of his aunts , artistically known as La Gilica de Marchena , who sang Solea .
Two of his brothers were also guitarists , like his son Enrique de Melchor , who continued the family tradition .
 Playing the guitar , his son Enrique de Melchor accompanied several singers of his son Enrique de Melchor time , such as Manolo Caracol , La Nina de los Peines , and Antonio Mairena .
 In 1966 , his son Enrique de Melchor was awarded the National Prize Flamenco Guitar , the highest award of its kind .
 In 1974 his son Enrique de Melchor performed with Paco de Lucia at the flamenco festival of La Union on the coast of eastern Spain .
 his son Enrique de Melchor died in Madrid in 1980
Rio Ancho is a Spanish flamenco guitar jazz piece that combines flamenco and gypsy jazz influences .
The piece is in the key of E minor and progresses to A minor , D , G , C and B7 .
The original performances of the song had notable flute solos towards the end of the piece , reminiscent of classic Spanish gypsy music with trumpets .
The track first featured on Paco de Lucia s 1976 album Almoraima .
 In 1980 , Paco de Lucia and Al Di Meola collaborated and produced an ensemble track composed of Di Meolas Mediterranean Sundance taken from Paco de Lucia 1977 album Elegant Gypsy with Rio Ancho .
It was performed live in San Francisco on December 5 , 1980 and the set was released by Columbia Records as simply Friday Night in San Francisco .
The collaborative version of the song consists of a relatively simple lyrical harmonic progression , adorned by a flamenco rhythm .
 However , The collaborative version of the song poses extreme technical difficulties to the performers , due to the speed and precision required of Di Meolas picking on the steel-stringed guitar , playing extremely long melodic phrases , and to Paco De Lucias complex fingerpicking on the Flamenco guitar , as well as the exact matching of Di Al Di Meola and De Paco de Lucia solos which frequently consist of them both playing a rapid set of matching or corresponding notes .
They resort to many guitar performance techniques and fingerstyles , such as drumming guitar tops , strumming , bare thumb plucking , palm muting , tremolo picking , hammer-ons and pull-offs , sweep picking , shredding , vibratos and glissandos .
The song was an instant success .
A slightly shorter version of it was included in the November 1996 album Pavarotti & Friends for War Child .
The 1980 version proved the more successful version and the Mediterranean Sundance and Rio Ancho track has since been performed by many artists such as Marco Porcu , Seis Cuerdas , Jorge Martinez and La Pena Flamenca and has become a gypsy jazz classic
Luis de Cordoba , born Luis Perez Cardoso in Posadas on May 15 , 1950 , is a Spanish flamenco singer .
 Luis de Cordoba won 2 national awards in the National Contest of Flamenco Art in Luis de Cordoba in 1974 and 1977 and numerous others .
 In 1980 and in 1986 Luis de Cordoba participated in the Bienal de Sevilla .
 In 1994 Luis de Cordoba was featured on a compilation CD entitled Duende : From Traditional Masters to Gypsy Rock alongside fellow singers Camaron de la Isla , Enrique Morente , and top guitarists such as Paco de Lucia , Sabicas , Ramon Montoya and Tomatito .
 In December 2007 Luis de Cordoba was honored by the University of Cordoba with the St. Thomas Aquinas Award , and in June 2009 , took the position as head of flamenco at the university .
 Luis de Cordoba is the author of the book El Flamenco : Tradicion y Libertad
Estrellas is an album by the Gipsy Kings released in 1995 in Europe .
 Estrellas is virtually the same album as Tierra Gitana albeit with a different song order , which was released one year later in the US .
The only differences are the replacement of the song Los Peces en el Rio for the instrumental song Forever ; the songs Mujer are also slightly different .
Also note that A Tu Vera is a different version than the one that appeared on The Best of the Gipsy Kings
Radio Tarifa was a Spanish World music ensemble combining Flamenco , Arab-Andalusian music , Arabian music , Moorish music and also influences of the Mediterranean , of the Middle Ages and of the Caribbean .
 The name of the ensemble comes from an imaginary radio station in Radio Tarifa , a small town in the southernmost Spanish province of Cadiz , Andalusia , the nearest part of Spain to Morocco .
 Instead of simply fusing musical styles as the Middle Ages currently exist , Radio Tarifa goes back in time to the common past of those styles , back to before 1492 when the Moors and Jews were exiled from Spain .
 This invented style sheds light upon the real styles of Spain , most notably flamenco although the band rejected all musical purism , preferring to mix arrangements of traditional compositions with This own melodies and combining instruments from Ancient Egypt , classical Greek and Roman times with modern saxophones and electric bass .
Both Fain Duenas and Vincent Molino were students of Moroccan multi-instrumentalist and composer Tarik Banzi of the Al-Andalus Ensemble .
 Together Both Fain Duenas and Vincent Molino founded an early music group playing music from the late Middle the Middle Ages and Renaissance called Ars Antiqua Musicalis , although this group was unable to find commercial success .
 When Both Fain Duenas and Vincent Molino met Benjamin Escoriza , a troubador flamenco singer raised by Gypsies , in Madrid in the late 1980s the last piece was in place .
 Both Fain Duenas and Vincent Molino first recording together , Rumba Argelina , was recorded in 1993 and became a sensation in Europe when Their first recording together was released in 1996 , and again when Their first recording together was issued in America in 1997 .
 The critical and financial success of that disc made it possible to put together a full-fledged touring band which played Germany , Italy , France , United Kingdom , Ireland , Belgium , Switzerland , Holland , Portugal , Sweden , Finland , Norway , Denmark , Luxembourg , Hungary , Slovenia , Austria , Greece , Turkey , Morocco , Egypt , Palestine , Australia , New Zealand , Brazil , Colombia , Mexico , Canada and the United States .
 After nearly 20 years together , according to Both Fain Duenas and Vincent Molino website Both Fain Duenas and Vincent Molino farewell performance occurred November 2006 , in Barcelona .
Benjamin Escoriza died on March 9 2012 at the age of 58
Ole is the ninth studio album by Spanish duo Azucar Moreno , released on Sony International in 1998 .
After the commercial success of the 1996 album Esclava De Tu Piel which had produced five hit singles followed by Muevete Salvaje from the 1997 hits compilation Mucho Azucar - Grandes Exitos , Azucar Moreno teamed up with producer Ricardo Eddy Martinez in Miami again for the recording of 1998 album Ole .
 The album included further original material from Spanish singer Miguel Gallardo and Luis Cabanas , the team that had composed most of the singles on the preceding Esclava De Tu Piel , collaborations between Miguel Gallardo and David Ferrero and Pedro del Moral , songs by producer Richardo Eddy Martinez and it also saw one of the Salazar sisters , Encarna , making Encarna debut as composer on the track Dime Que Me Quieres .
Production-wise Ole followed the winning combination of up-to-date club beats fused with flamenco and rock and contrasting R&B ; influenced ballads and rumbas , arrangement-wise the album differed slightly to its predecessor as it featured live strings on several titles .
The album also closes with the acoustic No Pretenderas , with instrumentation of just flamenco guitars and palmas - and a guest appearance by the duos brothers Los Chunguitos .
The lead single was the title track Ole , just like Solo Se Vive Una Vez musically influenced by contemporary dance genres like reggaeton and dancehall but , as the title suggests , lyrically a tribute to the duos native Spain .
 Ole was also released as two separate remix singles , the second entitled Ole - The Summer 99 Remixes featuring the track remixed and with additional production by renowned Latin remixer , DJ , music producer and arranger Pablo Flores , best known for being Gloria Estefan s personal remixer but also for having co-produced major hits for among others Madonna , Chayanne , Shakira and Ricky Martin .
 Flores Club Mix of Ole was substantially rearranged from the original , not just by speeding up the tempo for the dancefloor but by adding new orchestration of brass , flamenco guitars and castanets to emphasize the songs lyrics and the track proved to be another big hit single for Azucar Moreno in both native Spain and Latin America .
The second single released and second big hit was !
Mecachis !
, a midtempo dance track again written by Miguel Gallardo and Luis Cabanas and also issued with a series of dance remixes on the !
Mechachis !
 - The Alabim-Bom-Ba-Remixes release , mixed by co-producers Pedro del Moral and David Ferrero .
Further hit singles from the album include Cumbaya , the double A-side Ese Beso/No Pretenderas and Agua Que No Has De Beber .
 While Ole didnt manage to match the extraordinary sales figures of the preceding Esclava De Tu Piel - half a million in native Spain alone - half a million in Spain did sell some two-hundred thousand copies and was later awarded double platinum in native Spain
