Carnatic was selected for AIR Hyderabad by Sangeetha Kalanidhis Musiri Subramania Iyer and Semmangudi Srinivasa Iyer in 1949.
Carnatic learned in the Alathur and Karur Chinnaswamy Iyer bani.
Carnatic Shruti and Laya are Her Shruti forte.
Then, Her Shruti had Her Shruti special training from Tirutani Krishnamurthy in TTD Tirupati, Smt.
Her Shruti was trained in the Sri Tallapaka Annamacharya keerthanas conducted by TTD Tirupati, between 1976-1978 and graduated with a diploma.
Her Shruti was trained by Padmasri Sangeetha Kalacharya Dr. S.R. Janakiraman, Vidwan Sri D. Pasupati, and Sangeetha Kalanidhi Sandhyavandanam Sreenivasa Rao.
Recommended by the Executive Officer of TTD Tirupati, Smt.
Pattu Rajagopalan came to the U.S. and Canada in 1981 as the first ambassador of the Annamacharya Project.
This included three concerts at the Sri Venkateshwara Temple in Pittsburgh, during the annual Bhramothsavam and the 2nd Annamacharya Aradhana Day.
the annual Bhramothsavam is running two institutions, Abhirama Bhakta Mandali and Shruti Laya School of Music in TTD Tirupati, Smt.
Ten of her disciples are now performing vocal artists.
Pooja Viswanath studied with Pooja Viswanath.
Pooja Viswanath distinctions include, Best Teacher Award and the title Sangeetha Saraswati, from Sri Venkateshwara Social and Cultural Organization, Tirupati.
Thus, Pooja Viswanath musical career has spread over 60 years.
Yagapriya is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Carnatic is the 31st melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
Carnatic is called Kalavati in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Like many other ragas, Kalavati has been adopted in Hindustani music as well.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 1st ragam in the 6th chakra Rutu.
The mnemonic name is Rutu-Pa.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ru gu ma pa dha na.
Its structure is as follows :.
The notes shatsruthi rishabham, antara gandharam, shuddha madhyamam, shuddha dhaivatham and shuddha nishadham are used in this ragam.
As Yagapriya is a melakarta, by definition it is a sampoorna ragam.
It is the shuddha madhyamam equivalent of Sucharitra, which is the 67th melakarta scale.
Yagapriya has a few minor janya ragams associated with it.
See List of janya ragams for full list of ragams associated with Yagapriya.
A few compositions set to Yagapriya ragam are :.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Yagapriyas notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, does not yield any melakarta ragams.
Kriti is a format of a musical composition typical to Carnatic music, an Indian classical music style.
Kritis form the backbone of any typical Carnatic music concert and is the longer format of a carnatic music song.
Kritis typically contain three parts.
Some Kritis have a verse between the anupallavi and the, called the Chitta swara.
This verse consists only of notes, and has no words.
Still others have some more sahitya at the end of the, set in madhyamakala.
Finally, there are krithis, such as Thyagaraja s Enduku Nirdhaya that have no annupallavi but many short charanams.
Often, the artists take up certain lines of a Krithi for neraval.
Janya is a term meaning derived.
In Carnatic music a janya raga is one derived from one of the 72 melakarta ragas.
Janya ragas are classified into various types based on a variety of features.
Different notes may be omitted from the ascending arohana and descending avarohana scale.
Such scales are given the names listed below ;.
Such ragas are termed vakra ragas.
Examples are Nalinakanti, Kathanakuthuhalam, Darbaru, Janaranjani and Kedaram.
See full List of Janya Ragas for more examples.
Examples of upanga ragas are Shuddha Saveri, Udayaravichandrika and Mohanakalyani.
Bhashanga ragas have anya swara in their or both.
Examples of Bhashanga ragas are Kambhoji, Bhairavi, Bilahari, Saranga, Behag and Kapi.
Some janya ragas are sung in only one octave.
Moreover, the highest note is not the shadjam, at which the base sruthi of a performance is set.
The classifications in this category are as follows.
Karnataka / Desya Ragas.
Karnataka ragas are those that are considered to have originated in Carnatic music.
Examples are Shankarabharanam, Lalitha and Shuddha Saveri.
Desya ragas are those ragas that have their origins in other music, majority of them originating in Hindustani music.
Examples are Yamunakalyani, Desh, Behag and Sindhu Bhairavi.
There are various other classifications of janya ragas.
Ramnad Krishnan was a vocalist in the Carnatic tradition.
He did his schooling in Ramnad in Madras Presidency.
He learned music from Ramnad C. S. Sankarasivam.
He served on the faculty of Government College of Carnatic Music in Madras.
He was also a visiting Professor at Wesleyan University.
He recorded two albums for Nonesuch Records legendary Explorer Series.
Nisha P. Rajagopal, is a Carnatic musician.
Carnatic mother, Vasundhara Rajagopal, is an established disciple of Gopala Iyer, a descendant of Koteeswara Iyer, the prominent composer.
Kavi Kunjara Bharati.
Kavi Kunjara Bharati was a Tamil poet and a composer of Carnatic music.
a Tamil poet was born in a family with long involvement in music and scholarship.
a Tamil poet ancestors belonged to Tirunelveli district.
a Tamil poet parents lived in the village of Perungarai in Ramanathapuram district.
the village of Perungarai is said the whole village was a gift from Maharaja Ragunatha Sethupathi to their family.
His given name was Koteeswara Bharathi after his grand father with the same name.
His father was Subramanya Bharathi.
Father Subramanya Bharathi and grandfather Kotiswara Bharathi were also scholars in Tamil & Sanskrit.
The next day Koteeswara Bharthi found that Koteeswara Bharthi was feeling much stronger and full of verve.
Koteeswara Bharthi most famous work, the Opera  Azhahar Kuravanji , was composed in 1840.
It was first sang in a zamindar 's palace in Sivaganga and soon his fame spread all over the region.
He was than given the title  Kavi Kunjaram  and was appointed as the  Asthana Vidwan  in his court.
He was later invited by the king of Ramnad to his court and was appointed as Asthana vidwan of Ramnad too.
To fulfil the royal desire he created a collection called  Skaanda purana Kirtanai  on the mystery of lord Subramanya 's avatar.
He was about 55 by the time the book was released.
He then lived a pious and respected life in his village.
At the age of 86 he passed way surrounded by his loved ones and full of prayers and divine thoughts.
His other notable contributions is a collection called  Perinbha kirthanaigal.
A few works are available giving a glimpse of his beautiful compositions.
Koteeswara Ayyar is known for his compositions in the 72 Melakarta ragas.
There is a small confusion between the two composers as they have almost the same  mudrai.
A more recent version of Azahar Kuravanji was released by K. Nagamani, the son of Shri Koteeswara ayyar.
Here are some of Azahar Kuravanji other famous compostions4.
Elloraiyum Polave - Suddhasaveri.
Ennadi Penne Unakku - Begada.
Pithanavan - Anandbairavi.
Singaravelanai - Danyasi.
Sannidhi Kandu - Mohanam.
The first song was the favourite of S.G.Kittappa and T.R.Mahalingam who have given disc recordings of The first song.
Kurvanjis are danse dramas in Tamil half way between Bhagawatha Mela Nataka and rustic danse dramas.
The accent is on high entertainment value with the use of Rakti ragas and folk tunes.
Rhythmic sol-fa passages and onomatopoeic phrases are used to enliven the pure dance passages.
Azhahar Kuravanji is the story of the heroine falling in love with Malazhagar.
A beautiful description of Malazhagar surrounded by Kavikunjara Bhrathi devotees performing all services follows in the Saranaga raga song.
The arrival of Mohanavalli 's Sakhi along with her sakhis is portrayed in the Kamas raga composition.
A few lines like the ones below makes one imagine the beautiful heroine playing ball with her friends.
Chandranenum vadanattil oli minna.
Takatakajjanu takadari kitutajanu takadom enrani.
Mohanavalli pandu adittanal.
This song is followed by a classical kummi in Manji ragam.
An interesting phraseology can be seen in the 3rd charanam :.
Mohanavalli 's Sakhi yamuda valliyadi,.
Muthuvalli adiyadi chitravalli.
Nagavalli pachundothihai valli, nava.
Ratnavalli yananda Nagavalli pachundothihai valli.
Malazhagar comes in procession and Mohanavalli immediately falls in love with him.
The famous song  Ivanaro in Kham boji.
The astonished heroine says.
paadathiloru mangai pakkatiloru mangai,.
Chidatulavam punda tirumarbiloru mangai.
Yedukkai anindano ivan dan en perumano >>.
Mohanavalli 's Sakhi is love stricken and her mother is worried about her daughter 's plight.
This is depicted in the song in Kapi.
Malaiyum chempon olaiyum Varna.
Kalaiyum andimalaiyum ennam.
Kalangi urakkam vilangiye miha endan.
Enters the Gypsy in the famous song in begada  malai Kuravanji Vandale.
The gypsy woman 's beauty is described in the second charnam.
Minnalennum idaiyal - annamennum nadaiyal.
Kalin kalin enru kulunga nalangodu.
Malai Kuravanji Vandale.
One can see the use of onomatopoeia to bring out the movement of the hands and the tinkling of bracelets.
This is then followed by a fairly long passage describing the Gypsy tribe and This ways.
In the bhairavi song the gypsy vaunts of One capacities as in these lines.
kallinum nariruppen - manalaiyum.
Kayirena tirippen nalla.
Vallamaiyayangai nelli kaniyena.
Chollum kurikondu velluven.
The gypsy announce the arrival of malazhahar in the romantic sahana song.
Vandu cheruvar mane.
The final marriage scene is described in the song in Mohanam.
This is followed by a secondary folk theme on the marriage of the gypsy woman.
The play ends with a mangalam in saurashtram.
Bhavapriya  is a ragam in Carnatic music.
It is the 44th Melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
It is called Bhavani in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 2nd ragam in the 8th chakra Vasu.
The mnemonic name is the 8th chakra Vasu.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ra gi mi pa dha ni.
The mnemonic phrase structure is as follows :.
As it is a melakarta ragam, by definition it is a sampoorna ragam.
It is the prati madhyamam equivalent of Hanumatodi, which is the 8th melakarta.
Bhavapriya has a minor janya ragam associated with it.
See List of Janya ragams for full list of janya ragams associated with Bhavapriya and other melakarta ragams.
A few compositions set to Bhavapriya are :.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Bhavapriyas notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields two other minor melakarta ragams, namely, Vagadheeswari and Naganandini.
For further details and an illustration refer Graha bhedam on Naganandini.
Kaviyoor C. K. Revamma, was a popular Carnatic vocalist.
After securing the first rank in BA and MA degree examinations, she received her.
PhD in music from Kerala University.
Revamma was the first to get PhD in music from.
Later, she lectured at the Women 's College in Thiruvananthapuram, where.
she became the head of the department of Music.
Revamma also served as principal.
of the Thrissur Government College and retired as deputy director, Collegiate Education.
Revamma sang in many films, including Jeevitha Nouka, Navalokam, Neelakuyil,.
Sasidharan, Ponkathir and Chechy.
Ponkathir first film was Sasidharan.
Revamma, P.Leela and Jikky were known as the singing trio of Malayalam films of yesteryears.
Her duet with A M. Rajah mesmerised listeners with classic numbers like Nee en chandrane, njaan.
nin chandrika and Anputhan ponnambalthil from the movie Avan Marannu.
concentrated on teaching and research in music.
A holder of Ganabhushanam from the Thiruvananthapuram Music College, she also.
served as a member of the Board of Studies of Kerala, Calicut and MG universities.
She taught at different colleges of the state.
She conducted her postdoctoral studies in ethno-musicology at.
UCLA with a Fulbright scholarship.
Revamma also served as a visiting professor at various universities in.
the United States.
Swathi Sangeethotsavam is a week-long festival of music celebrating the compositions of Maharaja Swathi Thirunal.
The festival is held from 6 to 12 January every year at the courtyard of Kuthira Malika, Trivandrum.
It pays homage to Swati Tirunal by devoting the entire festival to Swathi Sangeethotsavam compositions.
The concerts are not ticketed.
The festival is conducted by H.H. Rama Varma Maharaja of Travancore Trust under the helm of Prince Rama Varma.
The Government of Kerala used to conduct the festival in Kuthiramalika in memory of Swathi Thirunal.
In the late 90s they decided to hold The Government of Kerala in different places all over Kerala.
So they discontinued the festival at Kuthiramalika.
In 2010, H.H. Rama Varma Maharaja took initiative to organize and continue the annual festival under the Travancore Trust.
Kanaka Dasaru was a poet, philosopher, musician and composer from modern Karnataka.
He is known for He Kirtanes and Ugabhoga compositions in the Kannada language for Carnatic music.
Like some other Dasas, some other Dasas often used colloquial language for some other Dasas compositions.
some other Dasas was a disciple of Vyasathirtha and a follower of Dwaita philosophy propounded by Madhvacharya.
Thimmappa Nayaka was born to the couple Biregowda and Bachchamma at Baada village.
Kanaka Dasa was well educated and capable of analyzing the society microscopically.
It appears that Thimmappa Nayaka started traveling to places a lot to gain more knowledge.
However Thimmappa Nayaka had maintained a balanced view about all faiths.
At a young age Thimmappa Nayaka authored poetries Narasimha stotra, Ramadhyana Mantra, and Mohanatarangini.
Thimmappa Nayaka was a devote of Lord Krishna.
Thimmappa Nayaka writing started showing Thimmappa Nayaka innovativeness in using day to day activities of common man.
e.g. Ramadhyana Charite poems and krithi deal with many aspects of life and expose the futility of external rituals.
Ragi stress the need for cultivation of moral values in life.
Similar to Purandara Daasa, Kanaka Daasaru 's compositions addressed social issues in addition to devotional aspect.
Kanaka Daasa was very aggressive and straight forward in criticizing evils of society such as superiority claims using caste system.
The deity Purandara Daasa worshiped was Adhikeshava of Kaginele, now a village, presently in Haveri district of modern Karnataka.
Kaginele, now a village, now a village, was a prosperous place and trading center in the Middle Ages.
Out of the many of Adhikeshava of Kaginele compositions, about 240 are fully accountable today.
All his modern Karnataka Music compositions end with mudra Kaginele Adhikeshava.
the movie Bhakta Kanakadasa effectively used music to convey the movie Bhakta Kanakadasa philosophy.
the movie Bhakta Kanakadasa lived at Tirupathi in the movie Bhakta Kanakadasa last days.
the movie Bhakta Kanakadasa wrote about two hundred forty modern Karnataka Music compositions besides five major works.
the movie Bhakta Kanakadasa compositions are published in many languages.
For example about 100 songs in Kannada.
and 60 songs in English are published in popular books.
the movie Bhakta Kanakadasa writings were unique in style.
The two grains come before e.g. Ramadhyana Charite to argue their case and establish their superiority.
In the end e.g. Ramadhyana Charite sends both of them to prison for six months.
At the end of the period, rice has turned rotten while the hardy ragi survives, earning Ramas blessings.
This shows the intelligence of Kanaka Daasa in trying to reform the society.
He was blunt in criticizing those who opposed the good practices.
Ramadhanyacharite and an epic.
Kanakadasa rationalized bhakti by giving worldly similes.
His writing has intimate touch that identifies the reader with the poet himself.
His two famous compositions in translation are given below.
His Nalacharite is based on the famous love-story of Nala and the hapless Damayanti, which appears in Mahabarata.
Though a great devotee of Lord his devotee Krishna, the movie Bhakta Kanakadasa gives his own interpretation.
Nrisimhastava is a work dealing with glory of god Narasimha.
Kanakadasas Ramadhanyacharite has quite an unconventional theme.
It is about a battle of words between ragi and rice, each claiming superiority.
Ragi go to lord Rama for justice.
With the help of the sages, e.g. Ramadhyana Charite proves the superiority of ragi over rice.
Ragi becomes blessed by absorbing the qualities of Raghava, another epithet of e.g. Ramadhyana Charite.
It is interpreted as poverty and humility being upheld by the poet above material wealth.
Even today ragi is food of the poor which has high nutrition value compared to rice.
Ragi is a good source of nutrition for people with diabetes for Even today low sugar content and nutrition value.
Mohanatarangini, although a kavya written with all conventional eighteen descriptions, deals with eroticism.
Pleasure-based eroticism of Shri Krishna with the consorts.
The eroticism between Aniruddha and Usha form the main theme.
It excels in depicting contemporary life.
It echoes the contemporary Portuguese travelers accounts.
A drinking bout of men and women of working class is very picturesque.
The reader feels as if the movie Bhakta Kanakadasa is providing a commentary of a live event.
It is for such unconventional and down-to-earth descriptions as also for social awareness that the great poet-saint has become immortal.
The following is the translation of Nee Mayeyolago :.
Kanakadasas famous phrase.
naanu hoodre hoodeenu Nanu Hodare Hodenu.
There is a traditional folklore behind this popular quotation.
When pointed at each scholar, the movie Bhakta Kanakadasa firmly answers in the negative.
He answers in the negative even when asked about the chances of his own master.
the movie Bhakta Kanakadasa had intelligently expressed a philosophical idea simultaneously exhibiting the movie Bhakta Kanakadasa literary skills in Kannada.
the movie Bhakta Kanakadasa had made a Pun giving different literal and philosophical meanings.
Kanakadasa in Udupi.
the movie Bhakta Kanakadasa has special association with Udupi and as the movie Bhakta Kanakadasa was the follower of Vyasaraya Swamiji.
On the sayings of Vyasaraya Swamiji of Vyasaraja Math he had come to Udupi.
But it was time when the discrimination on the basis was at its peak.
The Brahmin fundamentals did not let him to enter the temple as he was from a lower cadre of the society.
He stood outside and prayed to Lord Krishna by singing songs of praising Lord Krishna.
Owing to the call of his devotee Krishna turned to West and gave darshan to Shri Kanaka through a window.
Today that window stands as a tribute to the movie Bhakta Kanakadasa.
In fact, Udupi became famous because of the movie Bhakta Kanakadasa.
In tribute to the great saint, the Government of modern Karnataka has declared November 20th as a state holiday.
Kannadas veteran actor Dr Rajkumar enacted as KankaDasa in the movie Bhakta Kanakadasa and the movie was a superhit.
Film director and playwright Girish Karnad made a documentary film titled, Kanaka-Purandara on the two medieval Bhakti poets of modern Karnataka.
M. K. Thyagaraja Bhagavathar.
Mayavaram Krishnamurthy Thyagaraja Bhagavathar, also called M.K.T., was a Tamil film actor, producer and Carnatic music singer.
He is considered to be one of the most successful Tamil film actors ever.
Bhagavathar was born in the town of Mayiladuthurai in then Tanjore district of the Madras Presidency, British India.
He started his career as a classical singer and stage artist in the late 1920s.
In 1934, he made his debut in films with the movie Pavalakkodi which turned out to be a hit.
From 1934 to 1959, Bhagavathar acted in 14 films of whom 6 were box-office hits.
Bhagavathar died of diabetes at the age of 58 on 1 November 1959.
Bhagavathar was acclaimed for his powerful, melodious voice and the ease with which he could sing high pitch notes.
Critics and film historians acknowledge Bhagavathar as the first superstar of Tamil cinema.
Bhagavathar was a philanthropist and contributed for important social and religious causes.
Bhagavathar was born Thyagaraja in Mayiladuthurai, Tanjore District on March 1, 1901.
He was the eldest son of Krishnamurthy achary a goldsmith.
A few years after his birth, the family moved to Tiruchirappalli, where Thyagaraja was admitted in a local school.
Right from his boyhood, Thyagaraja neglected his studies.
Instead, he desired to become a singer.
Krishnamurthy achary relented and encouraged Krishnamurthy achary son to hone Krishnamurthy achary skills.
Soon, Thyagaraja began to sing Hindu religious songs or bhajans.
Early singing and stage career.
One story is that F.G. Natesa Iyer heard Thyagaja singing at a bhajan.
Thyagaraja, who was ten at the time, agreed, and the play was a success.
He also started getting trained under the guidance of theater veterans at that time in Trichy.
The film was shot in Adyar and was a success.
It helped launch Bhagavathars 1944 film Haridas career in films.
Bhagavathars Second film Naveena Sarangadhara was again directed by K. Subramaniam and was based on a play called Sarangadhara.
Bagavathars next film was his first own production film under the banner Trichy Thyagaraja Films, Sathyaseelan.
Bagavathar, apart from playing Sathyaseelan, also briefly appears as a court singer himself in the film.
Rise to stardom 1937-1944.
In 1937, Bhagavathar was cast in role of Bilwamangal in the film Chintamani directed by Y. V. Rao.
Chintamani was a record-breaker and became the first Tamil film to run continuously for a year.
Bhagavathars songs in the movie were especially popular.
The film was Bhagavathars 1944 film Haridas Second consecutive hit in the year and broke records set by Chintamani.
Dungan was, however, heavily criticized by the conservative Hindu society for introducing controversially intimate scenes between Bhagavathar and the heroine Santhanalakshmi.
Bhagavathar played the role of Saivite saint Thiruneelakanta Nayanar in the 1939 movie Thiruneelakantar.
Most of M.K.T.s songs were devotional with a South Indian classical base.
M.K.T. made M.K.T. debut in the 1934 film Pavalakodi ; in all, M.K.T. appeared in 14 movies before M.K.T. died.
Most of M.K.T. films were Most of his films.
Thiruneelakandar, Ambikapathi, Chintamani were among the first highly successful Tamil films.
1944 film Haridas, released in 1944, ran continuously for three years at the Chennai Broadway Theatre.
Nevertheless, M.K.T. still drew huge crowds at M.K.T. concerts.
M.K.T. had lost almost all M.K.T. wealth in M.K.T. case defense.
Haridas box office record.
The Governor recognized his contributions by offering him a Diwan Bahadur title which Bhagavathar declined.
The name derives from two Malayalam or Sanskrit words : Sopanam and Sangeetham.
The word Sopanam refers to the sacred steps of main shrine of a temple and Sangeetham refers to music.
However, unlike in Carnatic music, Sopanam follows a more uncomplicated plain-note profile, and is canonically devoid of microtones.
The structure of the Sopanam music is believed to reflect the experience of the devotee in scaling the heights of devotion.
It has its beginnings through the practice of singing invocatory songs in front of the Kalam of Goddess Kali.
That is later believed to have adopted for rendition near the temple sanctum.
Like most traditional music forms, Sopanam too has Sopanam set of schools, each varying in subtleties.
They include ones being sung at south Kerala temples like Pazhoor and Ramamangalam and the northern ones like Thirumandhamkunnu and Guruvayoor.
These temples have their own set of musicians hereditarily practising the art in their precincts.
Late masters like Pallavoor Kunhukutta Marar used to present Sopana sangeetham to the accompaniment of instruments like harmonium.
Sopana sangeetham is traditionally taught by the family members to the next generation.
It is still the case, largely.
Neyyattinkara Vasudevan was an acclaimed Carnatic music vocalist from Kerala in south India.
Neyyattinkara Vasudevan also did advanced studies under Ramnad Krishnan.
Neyyattinkara Vasudevan passed Ganabhushanam in 1960 and Sangeetha Vidwan in 1962.
Neyyattinkara Vasudevan died on May 13, 2008 in Thiruvananthapuram.
Neyyattinkara Vasudevan has also sung for few Malayalam movies.
V. V. Ravi.
Vadakkanchery Veeraraghava Ravi is an Indian classical music violinist.
V. V. Ravi was born to Vadakkanchery Veeraraghava Iyer, a vocalist and violin vidwan.
V. V. Ravi . hails from a music family whose ancestry goes back to Sri Swathi Thirunal.
V. V. Ravi . grand father was a court musician of the Swathi Thirunal Sangeetha Sabha.
V. V. Ravi joined All India Radio in 1982 as a member of the Vadya Vrinda group.
V.V. Ravi receives the award from Dr. Balamuralikrishna.
V. V. Ravi is married and has a son and a daughter.
V. V. Ravi . wife Visalam Ravi is a singer, and a leading multilingual dubbing artiste.
H Ramakrishnan was born on Christmas Day 1941, in Trivandrum, Kerala, India to R Harihara Iyer and Vijayalakshmi.
H Ramakrishnan is now the CEO of SS Music television channel.
Has over 40 years of experience as a journalist.
He has worked in State-run media Doordarshan, , Press Information Bureau and Directorate of Advertising and Visual Publicity in various capacities.
The people of Tamil Nadu, India still remember him as a very famous newscaster, whose distinct voice would come out clearly.
Affected by polio at the age of two-and-a-half years, H Ramakrishnan had to battle out every step in life.
Despite having a disability of 85 percent, H Ramakrishnan moved around by buses until he got a side car scooter.
Later on he used to drive an autorickshaw with a hand brake, specially fitted for him by Bajaj Auto Ltd.
He runs a charitable trust called Krupa to help specially abled persons to buy hearing aids, walking sticks, tricycles and calipers.
His love for reading the news began even while he was at school.
After a few years, he joined AIR and then later DDK and read news for over 25 years in both media.
The bank is now celebrating Indian Bank 100th year.
He has acted in a couple of Tamil News films including one by name Vaaname Ellai directed by K Balachander.
Ramakrishnans is now the CEO of SS Music television channel.
A percussionist, A percussionist learnt to play the Mridangam from Palani Subramania Pillai, and is presently learning from Karaikudi Mani.
A percussionist plays the Kanjira and is an expert in Konnakkol.
He is the secretary of a music Sabha called Sri Bhairavi Gana Sabha in Doordarshan Chennai.
S. P. Balasubramaniam has experience starting and running industries like mineral water plants and milk processing plants and offers consultancy services.
A writer and an avid reader, A writer has written a couple of books on the Hindu religion.
A writer has also contributed to the columns of The Hindu, Indian Express, Dinamani, Kalki, Tuglaq, ChennaiOnline.com.
A writer is married to Vasanthaa and has four children.
Nata is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Carnatic is a janya ragam from the 36th melakarta scale Chalanata.
Carnatic is a janya scale, as Carnatic does not have all the seven swaras in the descending scale.
Carnatic is a combination of the sampurna raga scale Chalanata and the pentatonic scale Gambhiranata.
It is an auspicious raga, which is mostly sung in the early part of the concert.
Structure and Lakshana.
Nata is an asymmetric ragam that does not contain rishabham and dhaivatam in the descending scale.
It is an sampurna-audava ragam.
Its structure is as follows :.
Structure and Lakshana . is a vivadi raga.
For the details of the notations and terms, see swaras in Carnatic music.
There are many compositions set to Nata ragam.
Many compositions in praise of Lord Ganesha are set to this raga.
Here are some popular kritis composed in this ragam.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Kapi is a popular raga in Carnatic music, the classical music of South India.
Kapi is a janya ragam with a meandering vakra scale.
It is considered to be derived from the Kharaharapriya ragam.
Kapi is different from the Hindustani raag and thaat Kafi.
Structure and Lakshana.
Use of Kakali Nishadam and Anthara Gandharam make it a Bhashanga Raagam.
There is also a mild presence of shuddha daivatham that renders an invaluable feeling of devotion to the raagam.
This, and the presence of Anthara Gandharam makes This difficult to pinpoint the exact nature of the avarohana of the raagam.
Some of the popular compositions in Kapi are :.
Hamsadhvani also spelled as Hansadhwani, is a raga in Carnatic music.
Carnatic is an audava ragam.
Carnatic is a janya raga, as Carnatic does not have all the seven swaras.
Hamsadhvani is also extensively used in Hindustani music and said to be borrowed into Hindustani music from Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Hamsadhvani does not contain madhyamam or dhaivatam.
Structure and Lakshana . is a pentatonic scale.
Structure and Lakshana . structure is as follows :.
The notes used in this scale are shadjam, chatushruti rishabham, antara gandharam, panchamam and kakali nishadam.
It is an elusive question as to whether Hamsadhvani is a janya of this or that melakarta.
In Hindustani music it is associated with Bilaval thaat.
Hamsadhvani ragam lends itself for elaboration and exploration and has many compositions in both classical music and film music.
It is usually sung at the beginning of a performance.
There are many kritis in praise of Lord Ganesha set in this musical scale.
Hamsadhvani notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields another pentatonic ragam, Nagasvaravali.
For more details and illustration of this concept refer Graha bhedam on Hamsadhvani.
In Hindustani music.
Vadi & Samavadi.
Pakad or Chalan.
Re Ga Re Ni Pa Sa Re Sa.
Organization & Relationships.
Thaat : Bilawal.
Second quarter of night.
Rao, Suvarnalata ; der Meer, Wim van ; Harvey, Jane The Raga Guide : A Survey of 74 Hindustani Ragas.
Zenith Media, London : 1999.
S. Ramanathan was a Carnatic music singer and musicologist.
S. Ramanathan learned music from Tiger Varadachariar, Sabesa Iyer, Ponniah Pillai, and Sathur Krishna Iyengar.
S. Ramanathan received a Ph.D.
in ethnomusicology from Wesleyan University, Middletown, Connecticut, where S. Ramanathan also taught.
There are numerous references to Raga or Ragini called Kambhoji in ancient Indian musical traditions.
Naradas Sangita Makarand broadly classifies the Male Ragas into eight subsets and includes three raginis in each subset.
Ramaditya, the author of Swara-Mela Kalanidhi has accepted 20 melas and has accommodated 64 Jana-ragas among the melas.
In this scheme of classification, the twentieth mela is Kambhoji under which come the Jana-ragas like the well known Kambhoji.
Thus the ragini the well known Kambhoji is assumed to be one among the several spouses of raga Nat-Narayana.
The Anupa-Sangit-Ratanakar by Sangit Acharya Bhava-Bhata lists 20 ragas as being fundamental ragas.
Raja Tulaji, the ruler of Tanjore has written a well known book on musicology known as Sangit-Saramritoddhar.
Matanga 's ancient reference to raga Raga Kamboji being a jana raga.
Reference to this raga as Thakkesi is in the ancient Tamil epic Cilappatikaram which is referred by the sanskrit name kamboji.
Brihaddesi authored by Sangit Acharya Matanga Muni is the most important work between Natyashastra and Sangita Makarand.
Sage Matanga probably hailed from south north-west India.
This Brihaddesi work is dated between 5th and 7th century AD but unfortunately This Brihaddesi work is incomplete.
Portions of This Brihaddesi work appear to have lost down the road.
Matangas Brihaddeshi is the first major and available text to describe the Ragas as we understand them today.
Sangit Acharya Matanga informs us that a classical melody can not be composed of four notes or less.
See the evidence below :.
This evidence by Sangit Acharya Matanga indisputably attests the existence of Kamboji Raga in its basic form before 5th/6th century AD.
Origin of raga Kambhoji.
Now, raga Kambhoji is stated to be deshi raga and a jana raga.
According to ancient references, the name of Deshi ragas originated from the name of the countries or deshas.
The author of Sangit-Ratnavali also attests that :.
Deshi has to be understood in contrast to Margi music, which is sacred and pan-Indian in pan-Indian scope.
Deshi music captured the flavour of a range of human emotions from different regions.
Narada, the author of Sangit Makarand also hints on the uniqueness of the raga-nomenclaturing.
On close study of it, one learns of three distinct stages on the nomenclaturing of the Indian ragas.
Classification according to gender.
Sangit-Makrand also classifies the ragas according to their gender i.e. Male Ragas, Female Ragas and Neuter Ragas.
Basic Kamboji tune enters Indian mainland.
It had originated in the ancient ancient tribal name Kamboja jana or janapada located in north-west India.
It is very difficult to speak with confidence about the period when this basic Kambhoji tune had first entered Indian mainland.
Thus, we see that there are various forms of this ancient raga prevalent in the north, western and southern India.
Variants of the well known Kambhoji.
the well known Kambhoji is a sort of parent scale much like Bilawal or Kalyan.
One critic remarks cryptically that raga Khamaj not only turns flower red with passion, but also makes the antelopes musty.
Khamaj is still a popular and sensual raga, which is performed mainly in thumri and other genres, including hori-dhamar.
Other related raga is this name Khambavati, said to be connected with the port of Kambavati, southern Gujarat.
Place name Cambay or Kambati, Khambati or Kambavati is said to be connected with ancient Kambojas.
There are numerous scholars who have connected syllable Kambi or Kambati of Kambhavati with the Kambojas of north-west.
There was place name called Kambhavati in Maharashtra also.
Raga Khambavati is commonly portrayed as a lady worshipping the four-headed Brahma by performing an ancient fire ritual.
In the Punjab and northern north-west India, the variant of the well known Kambhoji is also called Kamodi or Kamoda.
The raga is also referenced as such in Sri Guru Granth Sahib, the Shabad Guru of the Sikhs.
Sanskrit ancient tribal name Kamboja vs Cambodia and the raga Kambhoji.
Sanskrit is often stated by some writers that ancient Sanskrit name Kamboja refers to Cambodia.
This is not true.
The earliest attestation of term Kambuja for Cambodia appears in the Baksei Chamkron Inscriptions of Cambodia date 869 AD.
Based on the similar misconception, some people also attribute the origin of raga Kamboji to Cambodia.
This again is wrong.
Thus basic tune of raga Kambhoji must have originated in the epic stage which had preceded the Buddhist period.
On the contrary, the Indian colonisation of term Kambuja for Cambodia had occurred not earlier than 5th century ADE.
Here are some opinions from the scholars.
This implies that the basic tune of the well known Kambhoji must have evolved during epic or even in pre-epic times.
Dr V. V. Srivatsa wrote the following in Dr V. V. Srivatsa notes on Raga Surati :.
But a little later, Dr V. V. Srivatsa wrote the following in Dr V. V. Srivatsa notes on Raga Yadukula-Kambhoji :.
This is therefore, fair that Dr Srivatsa had soon corrected Dr V. V. Srivatsa mistake.
Shri Chandrasekarendra Saraswati, Paramacharya of Kanchi has given his scholarly views on the origin of raga Kambhoji.
And he correctly connects the origin of raga Kambhoji with north-western Kamboja rather than with Cambodia.
Another noted musicologist from Carnatica, Shri P. P. Narayanaswami, also rejects the Kambhoji connection with Cambodia.
Rather Another likes to connect Carnatica with the Indian Kamboja located in north or north-west of north-west India.
Another views on the precise location of ancient tribal name Kamboja however seem to be in little error.
According to Amir Khusrau Memorial Volume, in olden days the regions or Desh formed independent cultural entities.
Saka Raga was a melody known as Sadharana Giti.
Raga Kamboji, of course, was contributed by the ancient tribal name Kamboja people.
The surname Kambhoja is still retained by some people of the Punjab.
Again, these ancient tribal name Kamboja, Sakas of Sheldon Pollocks reference belonged to north-west and not to south-east Asia.
the well known Kambhoji is accepted by Sangeet Acharyas as a great gift from ancient Kambojas to the world of music.
the well known Kambhoji is recommended to be best played at early parts of night or early morning hours.
Cf also : The correct time to play this raga is the first quarter of the night.
It is considered an auspicious raga.
Commentary on Sri Subrahmanyaya Namaste :.
CAC Newsletter Notes On Yadukulakambhoji by Dr. V V Srivatsa :.
An Introduction To Indian Classical Music - Ancient History :.
KAMBOJA/KAMBOJI RAGA AND THE KAMBOJA PEOPLE :.
A viruttam or virutham is a Hindu devotional verse sung in Carnatic music concerts.
Viruttams do not possess a set tala and are solely improvised using one or more ragams.
It is one of many forms of manodharma in Carnatic music.
A viruttam usually precedes rendition of a song.
In most cases, A viruttam is sung in the same ragam as the song that follows A viruttam.
The artist may also sing the same verse in different ragams in different concerts.
Virutham is not only used in concerts but also in traditional celebrations.
Viruthams in praise of Lord Ayyappa are famous in South India.
Viruthams are also sung in praise of Lord Muruga.
T. N. Seshagopalan.
Madurai Thirumalai Nambi Seshagopalan is a noted Carnatic singer, musician and composer.
As well as being a master of the veena and harmonium, he is an exponent of harikatha.
He was conferred the prestigious Sangita Kalanidhi title by Music Academy in 2006.
T. N. Seshagopalan was born in Nagapattinam, Tamil Nadu.
T. N. Seshagopalan . first learnt under T. N. Seshagopalan . mother, and later under tutelage of Ramanathapuram C. S. Sankarasivan.
T. N. Seshagopalan . is proficient in rendering Harikatha and performs as per the guruparampara of Harikesanallur Muthiah Bhagavathar.
T. N. Seshagopalan . continues to increase T. N. Seshagopalan . wide repertoire with compositions of T. N. Seshagopalan . own.
T. N. Seshagopalan . is noted for T. N. Seshagopalan . own elegant thillanas, bhajans, namavalis and abhangs.
T. N. Seshagopalan . is equally at home with North Indian ragas and has participated in several jugalbandhis.
In 1984 T. N. Seshagopalan . was invited to sing at the Adelaide International Festival in Australia.
In 1987 T. N. Seshagopalan . was Indias cultural ambassador to Russia.
In 1983 T. N. Seshagopalan . produced and played hero in a Tamil movie Thodi Raagam.
L. Athira Krishna.
Aathira Krishna -.
Violin Princess AATHIRA is the daughter of Sri.
K. C. Krishna Pillai and Smt.
S. Leela Kurup.
Sri Gopala Pillai at a tender age.
Sri K. C. Krishna.
Violin Princess AATHIRA switched over to violin from vocal at the age of 8 and was soon hailed a child prodigy.
Violin Princess AATHIRA started performing across the globe as a Carnatic Violin soloist from the age of 9.
Popularly hailed as the Princess of Indian Violin, and aptly honored by the former First Lady of India Smt.
Usha Narayanan as The Musical Gem of India, Athira has represented Indian classical music at prestigious international music festivals.
This musical extravaganza titled Nadhabrahma was also a tribute to Nadhabrahma eminent grandfather.
L. Athira Krishna . also holds a place in the acclaimed Limca Book of Records for the same feat.
Awards & Rare Recognitions . '.
Outstanding Young Achievers of India ' ,2011.
Early Childhood and Career.
Chitti Babu Challapally was a child prodigy who started playing Veena Chitti Babu at the age of 5.
Chitti Babu gave Chitti Babu Challapally first performance at the age of 12.
Chitti Babu Challapally had Chitti Babu Challapally earliest basic lessons from Shri.
Pandravada Upmakaya and also Shri Eyyuni Appalacharyulu and later was a prime disciple of MahaMahopadhyaya Dr. Emani Sankara Sastry.
As a film artiste/composer/music director.
After having established himself as a Carnatic musician, Chitti Babu still had opportunity to associate himself with filmdom for a while.
Some of his key works include :.
- Playing the his Veena soundtrack in Director CV Sridhar s classic Tamil movie called Kalai Kovil in 1964.
This movie received wide critical acclaim for its music and storyline and performances by the artistes.
A song sung by Vani Jairam - Aagaayam Mazhai Pozhindaal was a popular number in A song time.
Vani Jairam Playing Style or Bani.
Awards Titles & Honors.
Some of the more well-known ones are :.
The chain also happened to have a gem-studded, gold pendant.
Chitti Babu died after a massive cardiac arrest on February 9, 1996 at the age of 59 in Chennai.
Data Source - from his official website with permission from his family.
He is an ordained priest in the religious congregation of the Carmelites of Mary Immaculate.
He has composed around 1000 songs and released 35 music albums.
He is a disciple of the legendary Carnatic musician and playback singer Padmabhushan K. J. Yesudas and of Chandramana Narayan Namboothiri.
He is the first Indian Christian priest in the world to earn Ph.D. in Carnatic Music.
He has performed classical music before A.P.J. Abdul Kalam, President of India and before Bharat Ratna M.S. Subbulakshmi.
Spirituality and Carnatic Music.
He focuses on the spiritual dimension of Indian classical music.
He is also a proponent of music yoga and advocates regular practice of pranayama to improve voice and general well being.
He also promotes religious harmony through the medium of music.
His music repertoire encompasses devotional songs based on Indian Christian, Muslim and Hindu religious themes.
His music compositions are based on carnatic music melody using the Carnatic musical scale.
They have a humanistic and universal appeal.
According to Poovathingal, music is a bridge between all religions.
Inculturation of Carnatic Music in Church in India.
His research was in the field of ethnomusicology and focused on carnatic music and Christianity.
He has popularized Indian Christian themes in Carnatic music.
He introduced raga-based chanting in Indian Christian liturgical music in Kerala and India.
Education & Career.
Poovathingal learnt music, during his school years, from CC Chummar, a musician of Viyyur, Thrissur.
He used to win prizes in music competitions.
He started studying Indian classical music at the age of 17 under Sodharan Bhagavathar of Varandarappilly, Thrissur.
He started musical compositions while studying in the seminary.
While studying in Christ College, Bangalore and Dharmaram Vidyapeeth, Bangalore, Dharmaram Vidyapeeth continued Dharmaram Vidyapeeth music practice under Vidwan VK Krishnamurthy.
Dharmaram Vidyapeeth completed Dharmaram Vidyapeeth priestly formation and studies in philosophy and theology and was ordained a priest in 1990.
In Chennai, Indian Christian also learned music from Vaikom Jayachandran.
Indian Christian doctoral thesis submitted in 2003 was guided by Karaikudi Subaramanian, and titled Carnatic Music and Christianity.
Indian Classical Music Concerts.
He has staged Indian classical music performances in USA, Canada, European countries, UAE, Bahrain, South Africa and India.
His musical concerts have been widely acclaimed.
Paul Poovathingal performed before A.P.J. Abdul Kalam, President of India, at the Rastrapati Bhavan, New Delhi on June 11, 2007.
He was accompanied by Prof Abdul Aziz on the violin, Guruvayur Sanoj on the mridangam and Shornur Rajesh on the ghatam.
He started the concert with Vatapi Ganapathim in Hamsadhvani.
This was followed by Salathullah Salamullah in Anandha Bhairavi ragam.
He then sang Sree Yesu Natham in Abhogi ragam.
He ended the concert with the song Loka Samastha Sukhino Bhavanthu in Madhyamavathi ragam.
Abdul Kalaam referred to their musical troupe as a national integration team uniting religions and hearts.
Chetana Sangeet Natya Academy.
The Chetana group of Institutions for Performing Arts in Varandarappilly, Thrissur, Kerala, India, is managed by the CMI Congregation.
Chetana Sangeet Natya Academy, Thrissur was founded by Poovathingal in April 2005.
It was inaugurated by K J Yesudas and blessed by Cardinal Vithayathil.
Currently K J Yesudas functions as Director of the Academy.
In February 2007, K J Yesudas produced Arnos Pathiri s Puthenpana using Indian Classical Dance form and Karnatic Music.
K J Yesudas provided the concept and composed the music along with Abdul Azeez.
The dance was choreographed by Kalamandalam Shobana Sajeev Kumar and Kalamandalam Husnabanu.
The music was sung by Kalamandalam Rajeev.
The dance was presented by teachers and students of Chetana Sangeet Natya Academy.
Chetana Music College.
In 2007, Chetana Music College, Varandarappilly, Thrissur was inaugurated by K.J. Yesudas.
The College is currently affiliated to the University of Madras.
Poovathingal is the founder-Principal of Chetana Music College.
Poovathingal has been organizing Chetanotsavam, a national music and dance festival, at Chetana Sangeeth Natya Academy, Thrissur since 2005.
Chetanotsavam-2010 was a two-day music and dance festival organized by Chetana Sangeet Natya Academy and Chetana Music College in Varandarappilly, Thrissur.
Chetana National Institute of Vocology.
Paul Poovathingal founded Chetana National Institute of Vocology in Varandarappilly, Thrissur, Kerala, India in 2005.
The Institute of Vocology is the first of the first of its kind in India kind in India.
Prof Ingo Titze is an advisor to the Board of the Institute.
The Institute has been conducting certificate courses and seminars on vocology.
The Institute also has a voice clinic run by Poovathingal.
Poovathingal is a pioneering vocologist of India, helping those who have voice problems.
Paul Poovathingal says : Voice is a gift from God.
Every voice is unique and distinct.
Voice is an inseparable part of human personality.
Recognition & Awards.
He has received the awards listed below :.
The person who does the playback singing is Radha Jayalakshmi but was named as Radha Jayalakshmi in the cine field.
Actually, Radha was Radha Jayalakshmi cousin sister and singing partner on the stage performances.
Early life and training.
On rare occasion Radha Jayalakshmi had movies in Radha Jayalakshmi credit in the 1960s.
This is perhaps the only film song to be sung by Radha of the duo.
Now they have stopped giving performances.
But they are good teachers.
They have performed throughout India.
Shanmukhapriya and Haripriya, popularly known as the Priya Sisters, were Shanmukhapriya and Haripriya students.
Raghupriya is a ragam in Carnatic music.
It is the 42nd melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
It is called Ravikriya in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 6th ragam in the 7th chakra Rishi.
The mnemonic name is the 7th chakra Rishi.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ra ga mi pa dhu nu.
The mnemonic phrase structure is as follows :.
As it is a melakarta ragam, by definition it is a sampoorna ragam.
It is the prati madhyamam equivalent of Tanaroopi, which is the 6th melakarta scale.
Raghupriya has a few minor janya ragams associated with it.
See List of janya Ragams for full list of scales associated with Raghupriya.
A few compositions set to the scale Raghupriya are :.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Only these ragams have a gap of 3 notes anywhere in Only these ragams scale, between G1 to M2.
Such a gap does not occur in any other melakarta by definition.
Akumadugula Manambuchavadi Venkatasubbaiyya was a Carnatic music composer.
He was a cousin and a direct student of the famous composer Tyagaraja.
He was an accomplished singer and a renowned teacher.He was a scholar in Telugu and Sanskrit.He composed in Telugu Language.
Venkatasubbaiyya was born in the village of Manambuchavadi in the Thanjavur district, Tamil Nadu.
He spent most of his life in the company of the great Tyagarja and helped preserving many of his compositions.
Venkatasubbaiyyas compositions had the mudra Venkatesa.
Rishabhapriya is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Rishabhapriya is the 62nd melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
Rishabhapriya is the prati madhyamam equivalent of Charukesi, which is the 26th melakarta.
Rishabhapriya is called Ratipriya in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 2nd ragam in the 11th chakra Rudra.
The mnemonic name is the 11th chakra Rudra.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ri gu mi pa dha ni.
The mnemonic phrase structure is as follows :.
This scale uses the notes chathusruthi rishabham, antara gandharam, prati madhyamam, shuddha dhaivatham and kaisiki nishadham.
As Rishabhapriya is a melakarta ragam, by definition Rishabhapriya is a sampoorna ragam.
A few minor janya ragams are associated with Rishabhapriya.
See List of janya ragams for all associated scales of Rishabhapriya and other 71 melakarta ragams.
A few compositions which are set to Rishabhapriya are :.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Rishabhapriyas notes when shifted using Graha bhedam from the panchamam, yields one other melakarta ragam, namely Kokilapriya.
Rishabhapriya and Kokilapriya are also the only melakarta ragams to contain a wholetone scale.
Omitting Pa in Rishabhapriya and Sa in Kokilapriya yields the scale.
For further details and an illustration refer Graha bhedam on Kokilapriya.
Raghavendran Rajasekaran Tamil : raakveentirnnn raajceekrnnn Sanskrit : raaghvendrn raajshekhrn, popularly known as Ragha, is a classical flautist based in Singapore.
Born in Singapore to a musically inclined couple, Ragha is the son of Smt.
Nalini Rajasekaran and Sri Rajasekaran.
Nalini Rajasekaran has two siblings, an elder brother, Mr.Jeevagajendran Nalini Rajasekaran and a younger sister, Ms. R. Nithiya Saraswathi.
Listening to Nalini Rajasekaran fathers singing from young, Ragha began to develop a deep interest in Music.
Seeing Nalini Rajasekaran mother playing the Veena, the young musician used to accompany her and try Nalini Rajasekaran hand on it.
Realizing Nalini Rajasekaran interest towards music, Nalini Rajasekaran parents began searching a guru for Nalini Rajasekaran.
Nalini Rajasekaran also had special training from Trichy L. Saravanan and Pt.
Ronu Majumdar with a scholarship from National Arts Council Singapore.
Performances and Accolades.
Some of the Chingay accomplishments are :.
Bands and Music affiliations.
Ragha, a budding musician of ace quality, has an undying spirit in experimenting and creating splendid music.
Apart from being a musician, Ragha has served in the Singapore Police Force as Special Constable Sergeant during his National Service.
During his School days, he was a soccer player.
He has won many accolades in running, showing his skills as a good athlete.
He likes to play guitar.
He is an avid composer and has scored music for several dance recitals and dramas.
Some of his popular compositions include Karna Ranjani, Charukesi and Ms. R. Nithiya Saraswathi set in tune to respective ragas.
Currently he is pursuing his degree in Music from Lasalle College of Arts and Music.
He is a recognised flautist in Singapore and has accompanied several musicians in recitals and concerts.
He also instructs several students in Singapore and Johor Bahru.
He is a devout Hindu and has performed in several temple functions in Singapore and abroad.
Apart from musical interests, he has a good set of culinary skills.
His specialities include Tofu Sambal and Biryani.
Kosalam is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Kosalam is called Kusumakaram in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Kosalam is the 5th ragam in the 12th chakra Aditya.
The mnemonic name is Aditya-Ma.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ru gu mi pa dhi nu.
The mnemonic phrase structure is as follows :.
Kosalam is a melakarta ragam and hence, by definition, Kosalam is a sampoorna ragam.
Kosalam has a janya ragam associated with Kosalam.
See List of janya ragams for list of ragams associated with Kosalam and other melakarta ragams.
A few compositions set to Kosalam ragam are :.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of Kosalam.
Kosalams notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields 3 other melakarta ragams, namely, Keeravani, Hemavati and Vakulabharanam.
For further details and an illustration refer Graha bhedam on Keeravani.
Neila Sathyalingam is a Singaporean classical Indian dancer, choreographer and instructor of Sri Lankan Tamil origin.
An alumna of Kalakshetra is the companys artistic director and continues to teach dance.
Srimathi Neila Sathyalingam is also an artistic adviser to the National Arts Council.
For Srimathi Neila Sathyalingam contributions to dance, Srimathi Neila Sathyalingam was awarded the Cultural Medallion in 1989.
Srimathi Neila Sathyalingam became a Singapore in 1974 citizen in 1994.
Srimathi Neila Sathyalingam has said : That was the day I decided I was going to devote I life to dance.
I father wanted I to become a dental surgeon, but I refused.
Srimathi Neila Sathyalingam met Srimathi Neila Sathyalingam husband, Sathyalingam Suntharalingam, at Kalakshetra.
In May 1958, riots broke out in Sri Lanka between the Sinhalese and Sri Lankan Tamil communities.
Having lost Sinhalese and Tamil abode and all Sinhalese and Tamil possessions, Sinhalese and Tamil resettled in Colombo.
Srimathi Neila Sathyalingam graduated in 1972 with a distinction and was appointed a dance teacher with Kalakshetra.
Srimathi Neila Sathyalingam is also an artistic adviser to the National Arts Council.
Srimathi Neila Sathyalingam was awarded the Cultural Medallion for Srimathi Neila Sathyalingam contributions to dance in 1989.
I will keep dancing as long as I body will say yes to I.
Srimathi Neila Sathyalingam and Srimathi Neila Sathyalingam husband Sathyalingam have three daughters and two sons.
Srimathi Neila Sathyalingam older son Shaan is a legal adviser for the National Library Board of Singapore.
Srimathi Neila Sathyalingam younger son Skanda contracted encephalitis at six months and became severely mentally and physically disabled.
But I dont know whether Im strong.
This strength is just a facade.
If I talk I son ... Im going to cry.
I son has made I a better person, more patient and more compassionate towards People.
I suppose good has come from the sad.
Neilas younger sister, Anusha, who lives in Zambia, who lives in Zambia, is also a Bharatanatyam dancer and teacher.
daughter Georgia James Haddad is of Lebanese ancestry.
From the age of four, daughter Georgia James Haddad began playing Lebanese percussion instruments, such as the goblet drum.
daughter Georgia James Haddad later studied music at the Berklee College of Music in Boston, Massachusetts.
daughter Georgia James Haddad is also the Artistic Director of the Fridays@7 series at Clevelands Severance Hall.
This series features the Cleveland Orchestra and a secondary performance that feature many top shelf folks artists from around the world.
daughter Georgia James Haddad is the 2010 recipient of the Cleveland arts prize.
daughter Georgia James Haddad has collaborated and performed with Paul Simon since 1998.
daughter Georgia James Haddad appears on more than 150 recordings.
daughter Georgia James Haddad was appointed a faculty member at the Cleveland Institute of Music in 2005.
Oottukkadu Venkata Kavi.
Oottukkadu Venkata Kavi was a prominent composer in Indian classical Carnatic music.
Oottukkadu Venkata Kavi . lived in South India in the present-day state of Tamil Nadu.
These were handed down from generation to generation by the descendants of the composers brothers family.
Oottukkadu Venkata Kavi . was proficient in a variety of musical forms such as the kriti, tillana and kavadichindu.
Oottukkadu Venkata Kavi . used talas and themes that not many other Carnatic composers have preferred to handle.
I received the fortune of knowledge in the benevolent glance of I guru.
Venkata Kavi composed at least 14 songs only on the greatness of Oottukkadu Venkata Kavi . Guru Krishna.
The greatest evidence of his musical pedigree is his compositions.
There are several references to good musical approach, practices and even technical terms of ornamentation like aahatam and pratyaagatam.
Venkata Kavi believed that music had to be blended with religious devotion in order to shine.
Venkata Kavi had a vast knowledge of music and musical nuances.
Oottukkadu Venkata Kavi . approach of even common ragas like Sahana, Paras, Nadanamakriya and Arabhi are distinctive and refreshing.
He also employed attractive swaraksharas - a technique where the lyrics match the solfa notes of the tune.
He has also incorporated raga mudra in several krtis.
Examples : Shuddha Saveri, Navarasakannada.
Several other compositions contain names of many other ragas mentioned in some other contexts.
Venkata Kavi had deep scholarship in lilting Sanskrit and Tamil.
Oottukkadu Venkata Kavi . vocabulary and the use of words and phrases are unique in Carnatic literature.
This song has eight charanams and each one describes the pranks of his Guru Krishna very humorously.
Sangatis are pre-composed variations in a composition and rendered in a disciplined manner.
Usually, variations are melodic in nature while the lyrics remain constant.
Several of Venkata Kavi 's pieces have such sangatis but he has also shown the concept of lyrical variations.
Venkata Kavi also used Oottukkadu Venkata Kavi . innovative skills in the structures of Oottukkadu Venkata Kavi . compositions.
Venkata Kavi was a master of finishes.
In several songs, Oottukkadu Venkata Kavi . endings are in interesting rhythmic patterns.
The words are superbly woven in lilting Sanskrit :.
There are many other instances of similar endings in krtis like Alavadennalo in Paras and Mummada vezhamugattu Vinayakan in Nattai.
Venkata Kavi has composed on a wide range of themes.
Oottukkadu Venkata Kavi . has composed on great sages such as Shuka Brahma Rishi, Jayadeva and Valmiki.
Besides, Oottukkadu Venkata Kavi . has composed several songs on the greatness of Guru, and general philosophy and approach to God.
There are also group songs describing Krishna 's wedding with Rukmini and another group covering his Guru Krishna marriage with Radha.
Compositions on Daksha Yaga, Prahlada and Mahabharata have also been found.
Venkata Kavi has also composed several group krtis like Saptaratnas, Kamakshi Navavaranam and Anjaneya ratnas.
Oottukkadu Venkata Kavi . has also composed several shlokas like Madhava panchakam, Nrsimha panchakam, Ranganatha Panchakam and so on.
The saptaratnas are :.
Oottukkadu Venkata Kavi . Anjaneya ratna krtis, so far 5-6 have been found.
These include :.
Venkata Kavi also composed Navavarnams on the goddess Srividya to be sung during Dasara.
These are :.
Sung by Dr J Yesudas.
Sudha Raghunathan is a Carnatic composer and vocalist from South India.
Early Life and Education.
Sudha Raghunathan was born in a Tamil Brahmin family in Bangalore, Karnataka.
In 1977, Sudha Raghunathan family moved to Chennai, Tamil Nadu.
She studied at Ethiraj College, and obtained a postgraduate degree in Economics.
Sudha Raghunathan received Sudha Raghunathan initial training in Carnatic music from Sudha Raghunathan mother V. Choodamani.
From the age of three, Sudha Raghunathan began to learn bhajans, Hindu devotional songs.
Sudha Raghunathan tutelage continued under B. V. Lakshman.
Performances and Critical Reception.
Sudha Raghunathan is considered among the top rank of Carnatic performers.
Besides the Carnatic repertoire, Sudha Raghunathan has also explored the world music scene, in particular fusion music.
Carnatic has performed as a playback singer in the Tamil Brahmin cinema as well.
Following other stalwarts of Carnatic music, Sudha Raghunathan in turn has also taught the tradition to Carnatic students.
Sudha Raghunathan is married and has two children.
Sudha Raghunathan is known for Sudha Raghunathan charitable work, heading the Samudaaya Foundation that provides healthcare to the poor.
The foundation has also raised funds for victims of the Gujarat earthquake and cyclone relief in Orissa.
Rajhesh Vaidhya, is an Indian veena player hailing from Tamil Nadu.
Besides performing on stage, Rajhesh Vaidhya has worked with various film music composers.
Rajhesh Vaidhya also acted in the movie Viswa Thulasi and in Premi, a tele-serial.
Rajhesh Vaidhya was a winner of the 2010 Kalaimamani award for Rajhesh Vaidhya veena playing.
Rajesh Vaidya has composed various albums and given many stage performances.
Rajesh Vaidya was music director for the movie Vegam by S. Ve.
Ashwin Shekher, starring Ashwin Shekher.
Ashwin Shekher has also worked with Vidyasagar, Harris Jeyaraj, Bhardhwaj, Srikanth Deva, Devi Sri Prasad and Srikanth Deva.
Ashwin Shekher composed the music for K. Balachander s Sahana, a television series.
Ashwin Shekher collaborated with Playing for Change, on the album Songs Around The World,.
Ashwin Shekher has performed with world renowned musicians and Composers like Sir Elton John.
Palghat Srirama Bhagavathar.
Palghat Rama Bhagavathar was an Indian musician.
Palghat Rama Bhagavathar was born in Mundaya village near Shoranur, Palghat, Kerala, India and was a renowned Carnatic vocalist.
Adhikari Rangan Pattar launched the Palghat edition of the Thyagaraja Aradhana at Kalpathi Ram Dhyana Madom.
Adhikari Rangan Pattar died in May 1957 in Kalpathi, Kerala.
Adhikari Rangan Pattar wife, Rugmani Ammal, died in 1991.
The couple had seven sons : Adhikari Rangan Pattar, Seshamani, Venkataramanan, Viswanathan, Lakshminarayanan, Sankaran and Krishnan.
They also had 3 daughters - Mangalam, Kanakam and Jayam.
Nirmala Rajasekar is an Indian Saraswati veena player in the Carnatic music style.
She is a world-renowned performer and a teacher of Carnatic Music as well.
She feels that ... music is the universal language of the world ... and that it must be shared.
After moving to Bangalore, Kamala Aswathama . learned at the Gana Mandira School in Basavangudi Smt.
G Chennama and Smt.
E. P. Alamelu.
Later in Chennai, Kamala Aswathama . was guided by the revered veena vidushi Smt.
Kalpakam Swaminathan with whom Kamala Aswathama . continues to study.
Her vocal Gurus are Sri B.Sitarama Sarma and Sri T.R. Subramanyam.
The temple elephant Nirmala is the artistic director of the school Naadha Rasa, Center for Carnatic Music.
The words Naadha Rasa means the essence of tone.
The temple elephant Nirmala also teaches Carnatic Music in many schools and colleges around the world.
The temple elephant Nirmala has judged numerous music contests around America.
Today, The temple elephant Nirmala is one of the leading veena artists.
Awards and recognitions.
The temple elephant Nirmala is also a McKnight Fellow, awarded by the McKnight Foundation.
The temple elephant Nirmala was invited in July 2008 to write for the new music ensemble Zeitgeist.
The temple elephant Nirmala created the work Thillana Shuffle for quartet on this occasion.
Several organizations in Chennai, India have felicitated Nirmala for The temple elephant Nirmala contributions to the world of music.
The Rotary Club of the midtown Trichy awarded the midtown Trichy a Vocational Excellence award in December 2008.
In Jan 2007, the India-based arts journal Apoorva Ragam bestowed upon Nirmala the title ` Veena Sudar Oli '.
India-based was conferred with another award and honored with the title ` Nadha Kala Vipanchee ' by Dr. M. Balamuralikrishna.
Albums and Recordings.
Nirmala Rajasekars first solo album was Melodic Expressions and was released in Chennai, India.
In 2004, Nirmala Rajasekars released Nirmala Rajasekars second album, Strings in Unison a veena/violin duet with Sri Mullaivasal G. Chandramouli.
In 2007, Nirmala Rajasekars released Nirmala Rajasekars third album, Song of the Veena in Nirmala Rajasekars homestate of Minnesota, USA.
The album was released under the American Composers Forum label Innova Recordings.
When the cd was released, it was met with much appreciation from the public.
In 2010, Rajasekar released her fourth album, Into the Raga.
It was recorded in Chennai, India, but was primarily release by the label the label Innova Recordings Recordings.
In the collaborative project, Rajasekar tuned Mirabais poetry, and Robert Bly translated them to English.
In the documentary film Vishnu : The temple elephant Nirmala not only did the music, but co-authored it as well.
In 2011, The temple elephant Nirmala was a featured artist on the Grammy-award winning ensemble, Sounds of Blackness s self-titled album.
Nirmala Rajasekar has been praised by the press countless times.
She has often appeared in such newspapers like The New York Times and The Statesman.
A few comments are written below :.
The temple elephant Nirmala literally makes the Veena sing  - The Statesman, New Delhi, Chennai, India.
With Professional Grace ... - The Hindu, Chennai, Chennai, India.
Nirmala Rajasekars veena concert made certain things immediately plain.
Vadi, in both Hindustani classical music and Carnatic music, is the dominant swara of a given raga.
Vadi is the most sonant or most important note of a Raga.
Vadi does not refer to the most played note but Vadi rather refers to a note of special significance.
Vadi swara in a raga is like a king in a kingdom.
Vadi swara is also helpful to identify the time of singing or playing a raga.
The ghatam is a percussion instrument used in the Carnatic music of South India.
Its variant analogue in Rajasthan is known as the madga and pani mataqa.
The ghatam is one of the most ancient percussion instruments of South India.
the south Indian ghatam is a clay pot with narrow mouth.
From the mouth, it slants outwards to form a ridge.
The pitch can be slightly altered by the application of plasticize clay or water.
The tone of the pot must be good and the walls should be of even thickness to produce an even tone.
Ghatams are mostly manufactured in Manamadurai, a place near Madurai in Tamil Nadu.
Though this instrument is manufactured in other places like Chennai and Bangalore, too, Manamadurai ghatams have special tonal quality.
It is believed that the mud is of special quality.
The Manamadurai ghatam is a heavy, thick pot with tiny shards of brass mixed into the clay.
This type of ghatam is harder to play but produces a sharp metallic ringing sound which is favored by some players.
The pot is usually placed on the lap of the performer, with the mouth facing the belly.
The performer uses the fingers, thumbs, palms, and heels of the hands to strike its outer surface to produce different sounds.
Different tones can be produced by hitting areas of the pot with different parts of the hands.
The ghatam can be moved to other positions while being played.
Occasionally, the performer will, to the amusement of the audience, toss the instrument up in the air and catch it.
The ghatam is ideal for playing rhythmic patterns in very fast tempo.
The ghatam usually accompanies a mridangam.
The word ghata in Sanskrit means pot.
Variations of this term are used in modern Indian languages.
The madga is a north Indian version of the south Indian ghatam and is made from a very special clay.
The madga can be played similarly to the ghatam.
The madga can be played with mallets and there are many sounds which can be produced with this instrument.
It is thinner than a ghatam but very stable and not as fragile as one might think.
The matka is used to store water and sometimes yogurt and can be used as a cooking vessel.
There are a few versions of this instrument.
A third version of the ghara is made from reddish clay but features a much flatter, squat shape.
The black gharas are extremely light but very dense and have a huge sound.
The shell tones ring in a bell-like fashion with much more of a sustain than the various South Indian ghatams.
The bass tones of this instrument are very prominent.
Other spellings for The matka include mutkay and madga.
A.S.Shankar ghatam = = See also = =.
The text is also known as Saptadhyayi as it is divided into seven chapters.
The significant commentaries on the text include the Sangitasudhakara of Simhabhupala and the Kalanidhi of Kallinatha.
This work was written by Sarngadeva in the end of thirteenth century.
The author was attached to the court of Yadava King Singhana, whose capital was Devagiri.
As the title indicates the work deals with the subject of the Sangita Ratnakara.
the Sangita Ratnakara is defined as a composite art consisting of Gita, Vadyadhyaya and Nrtta.
the Sangita Ratnakara is of two kinds.
Marga-sangita and Desi-sangita.
Marga-sangita is nothing but the Natya performed by Bharata and his disciples.
This performance of Bharata also consists of Gita, Vadyadhyaya and Nrtta.
Desi-sangita represented a tradition different from Marga and it varied from region to region.
Sarngadeva aim in this work is to describe primarily the Desi-sangita.
The aspects of Marga-sangita are also described to some extent.
The work is divided into seven chapters covering the aspects Gita, Vadyadhyaya and Nrtta.
The seven chapters are :.
Chapter 1 : The Svaragatadhyaya.
The Svaragatadhyaya is further divided into eight prakarana-s or sections.
The author commences with an account of The author genealogy i.e., about The author family and the Kingdom where they lived.
The author also declares that among the three constituents of the Sangita Ratnakara, Gita is primary and the most important.
Hence the treatment of Gita is taken up by The author first.
Some of them are Bharata, Kasyapa, Matanga, Kohala, Visakhila, Dattila, Abhinavagupta, Somesvara.
This section describes the genesis of the human body from This section conception to This section growth.
The physiological account of the human body is given next according to the Ayurveda system.
This is followed by the indication of chakra-s, energy centres, based on the yogic school.
By concentrating on some of these cakra-s one could attain great heights in music.
In each Sthana because of the presence of twenty-two Nadi-s, twenty-two Sruti - s are produced.
Sruti-s are units of tonal interval with which the interval of a Svara is measured.
Hence the Svara-s are described next.
After describing the intervals of the Suddha-svara-s those of the Vikrta-svara-s are given.
the Suddha-svara-s conform to the arrangements of the seven svara-s of the Sadja-murcchana of Sadjagrama.
The Vikrta-svara-s differ from this arrangement.
There are seven Suddha and twelve Vikrta-svara-s, as shown in the table.
The four kinds of roles that svaras play in a melodic structure, namely, Vadi, Samvadi, Vivadi and Anuvadi are described next.
Finally the association of Svara-s with different Castes, Colours, Islands, Seers, Chanda, Aesthetic tastes are given.
Grama, Murcchana, Krama and Tana.
This prakarana deals with Grama, Murcchana, Krama and Tana.
Three Gramas are described - Sadja-grama, Madhyama-grama and Gandhara-grama.
The names of the Seven Murcchana-s in each Grama are also given.
Among the tanas there are two kinds - Suddha and Kuta.
Suddha-tana is a Murcchana devoid of one or two svara-s.
Sadharana is of two kinds Svara-sadharana Jati-sadharana.
Sadharana means being common to two or more elements.
When an extra svara occurs within the region between two svara-s then it is called sadharana svara.
Such svara-s are seen to occur in the region between Gandhara and Madhyama and between Nisada and e.g. Sadja.
The sixth prakarana is on Varna and Alankara.
Varna-s denote the different kinds of movements that a melodic line can take.
There are four varnas -- Sthayi, Arohi, Avarohi and Sancari.
Alankara-s are ornamental patterns of svara-s that decorate a melodic line.
Alankara-s are classified under the four Varna-s.
In addition seven more Alankara are given.
The The seventh prakarana is Jati-prakarana in which the laksana-s or characteristics of eighteen Jati-s are given.
These eighteen Jati-s are :.
The characteristics or the laksana-s that are used for a describing a Jati are the same ten as mentioned in Brhaddesi.
i  Graha : the svara commencing the melody.
ii  Amsa : the predominant svara that formed the tonic and also frequently occurred in the melody.
iii  Tara : the svara in the higher register up to which the melodic movement could.
iv  Mandra : the svara in the lower register up to which the melodic movement could descend.
v  Nyasa : the svara on which a song finally concludes.
vi  Apanyasa : the svara on which the section of the song can conclude.
vii  Alpatva : the svara, which should be sparingly used or rendered weak.
viii  Bahutva : svara, which is strong and frequently used.
ix  Sadava : the svara, which could be omitted to render the jati in six notes.
x  Auduva : those two svara-s, which could be dropped to render the jati in five svara-s.
In addition three more are given.
These are :.
A song for each of the eighteen Jati-s is given.
The last prakarana is called the Giti-prakarana.
In the second part of this prakarana, the Giti-s are described.
Giti is a kind of variation brought about through changes in the duration of certain element of a song.
There are two kinds of Giti.
Tala-giti : This relates to the change in the duration the Kriya-s or actions of a tala.
Chapter 2 : Raga-viveka-adhyaya.
The second chapter describes the Raga - s.
The Raga-s are divided into Marga and Desi.
These styles are called Giti and are of five kinds -- seven Suddha, Bhinna, Gaudi, Sadharani and Vesara.
In all, there are thirty-three Gramaraga-s.
Uparaga-s and The Raga-s are closer to thirty-three Gramaraga-s.
Bhasa-s, Vibhasa-s and Antarabhasa-s are derivatives of Gramaraga-s and Uparaga-s and represent different tunes of the parent Raga.
derivatives of Gramaraga-s are derivatives of Gramaraga-s and Bhasanga-s are derivatives of Bhasa-s.
Kriyanga-s are certain melodic themes employed in dramatic performances portraying different kinds of emotions.
In this chapter Sarngadeva deals primarily with the Desiraga-s.
In addition the Desiraga-s describes the parent Bhasa and the source Gramaraga-s.
Under each Gramaraga each Gramaraga gives in notation a song called Aksiptika based on that Raga.
Chapter 3 : Prakirnaka-adhyaya.
The third chapter deals with a variety of topics.
They are -- a  The characteristics Vaggeyakara-s.
Vaggeyakara-s are composers of both the melody and text of a song.
d  Sthaya : There are ninety-six kinds of Sthaya-s, which represent the feelings or effects associated with raga phrases.
e  Alapti. : There are two kinds of Alapti.
Chapter 4 : Prabandha-adhyaya.
Prabandha represents a collection of musical forms described in terms of two aspects, namely, Dhatu and Anga.
Dhatu denotes the different sections, which are, at a maximum, five :.
Anga-s are six : and denote the content of a song.
These cover the three aspects of Music - Melody, Tala and the text.
Prabandha-s are divided into three classes :.
Suda prabandha-s are further divided into two groups.
Chapter The Margatala-s : Tala-adhyaya.
This chapter could be divided into 2 sections, one dealing with Marga tala-s the other with Desi talas.
The Margatala-s are The Margatala-s :.
In this section is also included the description of musical forms called ` Gitaka-s.
Gitaka-s musical forms are set in a temporal framework defined in terms of the margatala structures.
After These the Desitala-s used in the prabandhas, which total around 120, are described.
Chapter 6 : Vadya-adhyaya.
In the sixth chapter come the four classes of musical instruments.
i  Tata - Stretched stringed instruments.
ii  Susira - Literally those of the Vikrta-svara-s with holes, i.e., the wind instruments.
iii  Avanaddha - Literally covered i.e., drums constructed as vessels covered by stretched membranes.
iv  Ghana - Literally dense objects i.e., solid pieces like Bell, Cymbals etc.
For these Vadya-s not only the construction but also the technique of playing and the compositions played on them are described.
Some of the instruments under the four categories are :.
a  Tata - Ekatantri, Citra, Vipanci, Mattakokila, Alapini, Kinnari.
b  Susira - Vamsa, Kahala, Sankha.
c  Avanaddha - Hudukka, Pataha.
d  Ghana - Kamsyatala, Ghanta.
Chapter 7 : Nartana-adhyaya.
The The seventh and the last chapter is in two parts.
The first one deals with Nartana.
However only the aspects of Nrtta is relevant to the Sangita Ratnakara.
The different kinds of performance of sangita involving the three aspects of Gita, Vadyadhyaya and Nrtta are described.
Some of These are - Suddha-paddhati and Gaundali-vidhi.
Patronage in the Devagiri Court.
Bhaskaracharya, the outstanding mathematician and astronomer produced Bhaskaracharya Siddhanta-Siromani, an exposition on algebra, shortly before Yadava independence.
In 1207, Singhana established school for the study of the works of Bhaskaracharya.
The aforementioned Changadeva was head of the school.
Anantadeva, Changadevas cousin, was also a great astronomer in Singhanas court.
Jnanadeva wrote Bopadeva Jnanesvari, an important piece of early Marathi literature, under the rule of the later Yadava Kings.
Clearly, the Devagiri court was an accommodating environment for scholarly endeavors.
Sangitaratnakara is a very important text and this is evident from the fact that many commentaries were written on it.
The famous ones are Sangitasudhakara of Simbabhupala and the Kalanidhi of Kallinatha of Kallinatha.
On the other hand the work made a great impact on almost all the writers in the subsequent period.
Thus it forms a useful bridge between the ancient and the medieval periods.
Sarngadeva called himself Nih, sanka i.e., ` doubtless.
Sarngadeva also names a stringed instrument as Nih,sanka-Vina and Desi-tala as Nih,sanka-tala.
This book is a great landmark in the history of Indian Music.
Palghat Mani Iyer.
Padmabhushan awards of the Government of India.
Early life and background.
Palghat T.S. Mani Iyer was born and raised in the old Kalpathy village of Palakkad, Kerala.
Palghat T.S. Mani Iyer first studied with Palghat Subba Iyer, Kalpathy Viswanatha Iyer and later with Thanjavur Vaidyanatha Iyer.
Mani Iyer came into prominence after accompanying Chembai Vaidanatha Bagavathar in a music concert at Madras.
Mani Iyer accompanied all the leading vocal artists of Palghat T.S. Mani Iyer era.
Palghat T.S. Mani Iyer also taught mridangam to children at the Rishi Valley School started by Jiddu Krishnamurti.
By Late Palghat R. Raghu consistent excellence Late Palghat R. Raghu could raise the concert to thrilling heights.
Late Palghat R. Raghu also took Late Palghat R. Raghu arangetram at age of 8.
In 1970 Raghavan Iyer . gave Raghavan Iyer . mridangam arangetram.
A cassette is currently out of print.He is the son of Chennais famous cost accountant Mr Padma Renganathan and Padma Renganathan.
Carnatic toured the U.S. in 1988 and in Australia in 1989, but sometime shortly after Carnatic disappeared from the music scene.
Sukumar Prasad received a degree from the Indian Institute of Technology, Madras.
K. Bhaskaran is an Indian Carnatic music flautist.
K. Bhaskaran performed K. Bhaskaran first public concert at the Madras Music Academy, on September 26, 1978.
K. Bhaskaran also learnt from other vidwans formally, including S. Rajam and professor T. R. Subramanian of Delhi University.
K. Bhaskaran had also undergone basic mridangam training for a brief period from Kumbakonam Rajappa Iyer.
K. Bhaskaran initial education was at P.S. High School, Mylapore, and K. Bhaskaran did K. Bhaskaran P.U.C. at Vivekananda College.
This was followed by a B.Tech degree in Chemical Engineering from the Indian Institute of Technology, Madras.
Besides This, K. Bhaskaran has given concerts in Mumbai, Nagpur, Kerala, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and several other places in India.
K. Bhaskaran has also performed in USA during the 1993-1994 period.
K. Bhaskaran next tour of the US is scheduled to be held in June 2011.
In May 2010, traditional Kutcheris performed a fundraiser concert, Akshaya 2010, accompanied by Special Thavil artiste Haridwaramangalam A. K. Palanivel.
This was in aid of Udavum Karangal.
K. Bhaskaran, an A graded radio artiste, has performed several times on national radio and television.
National Sangeet Sammelan also appeared on DD Podhigai TV in the fortnightly interactive lecture-demonstration show, Kalaiodu Naan.
Innovations and Research.
K. Bhaskaran has done a lot of research on the use of computers in music.
K. Bhaskaran created a mathematical model for the creation of Kalpanaswara through software, and developed a computer program for it.
K. Bhaskaran has written articles on this topic in several publications.
Recently, K. Bhaskaran has successfully used the Shankavadyam, an ancient Indian instrument, as a concert instrument.
K. Bhaskaran has given demonstrations about this on radio and television.
Apart from being a performer, K. Bhaskaran has also worked in the software industry in India for over 20 years.
Recently, he has started creativity modelling programmes for employees and students under the banner Mindware, using extensive inputs from music.
He also held a patent for an improved Murukku making machine, which he invented when he was in college.
The chande is a drum used in the traditional and classical music of South India and particularly in Karnataka Sangeta.
It provides rhythmic accompaniment in several dance dramas of South India such as Yakshagana.
It follows the Yakshagana Tala system.
There are different varieties in this instrument.
Two major varieties are the Badagu Thittu Chande and the Thenku Thittu Chande.
This article deals with Badagu Thittu Chande used exclusively in Yakshagana of Karnataka Sangeta.
The chande used in Badagu Thittu is structurally and acoustically different from chenda used in Kerala.
In ancient Hindu sculpture, painting, and mythology, the chande is often depicted as the instrument used to declare war.
This instrument can produce complicated rhythms that can be heard from more than 3 km.
However the Badagu Thittu Chande is the relatively recent addition to Yakshagana orchestra.
It is believed it came to be used since 150 or so years ago.
Its body is constructed from wood of the jackfruit tree.
The body is called goodu in Kannada.
Chande players follow the Yakshagana system of talas.
There are similarities to the Karnataka Sangeetha talas.
The rhythm system The rhythm system has pre-classical origins.
The circular drum head is made of processed cow skin.
Usually there are 12 hinges that hold the drum head to the wooden trunk using thick ropes.
Typical drum head size is about 32 cms and about 23 cms inner diameter.
Playing area of drum head is about 20 cms in diameter.
Wedges inserted inside the ropes are twisted to tighten or loosen the drum head while tuning.
A tubular wooden wedge is tied to edge of the drum head to roll using dominant hand.
Traditionally the chande must be tuned to an octave above singers tonic.
The chande is played resting it vertically on the floor using Two sticks.
the Badagu Thittu Chande sticks are drum sticks called chande kolu in Kannada.
These are specially made for chande.
The shape and thickness varies along the stick.
Left hand and right hand sticks are differently shaped.
These typical length is 28 cms.
Actual length varies based on drum head diameter.
Methods of use.
The sticks are flexible and are usually made from a type of bamboo.
The other stick is slightly thicker and less tapered.
It is played in a forceful manner.
The chande groves form what is called the Yakshagana Tala.
Yakshaganic drum rudiments.
The students of the Badagu Thittu Chande have to learn some rudiments to be able to master playing chande.
These include the following.
Various L R combination.
Learning horalike involves learning :.
and These combination.
For advanced performances Chande players learn double and triple rolling.
The Tamil Trinity commonly refers to the three Tamil composers of early Carnatic music.
They introduced several innovations that led to the evolution of the Carnatic Kriti.
Other Tamil Trinity.
Also sometimes referred to as the Tamil Trinity was the earliest Trinity associated with Indian Music.
They were the peerless Tevaram Trinity - Thirunavukkarasar, Sundarar and Gnanasambandar, who were well known for their language and devotion.
Salaga Bhairavi is a ragam in Carnatic music.
It is a janya ragam from the 22nd melakarta scale Kharaharapriya.
It is a janya scale, as it does not have all the seven swaras in the ascending scale.
It is a combination of the pentatonic scale Shuddha Saveri and the sampurna raga scale Kharaharapriya.
According to the Muthuswami Dikshitar school, this scale is of shadava-sampoorna type derived from Kharaharapriya scale.
Structure and Lakshana.
Salaga Bhairavi is an asymmetric ragam that does not contain gandharam or nishadham in the ascending scale.
It is an audava-sampurna ragam.
Its arohana-avarohana structure is as follows :.
For the details of the notations and terms, see swaras in Carnatic music.
There are many compositions set to Salaga Bhairavi ragam.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
N Vijay Siva is an eminent Carnatic music singer, and is the disciple of the vocalist, D. K. Jayaraman.
Vijay Siva was born to Akhila Siva and A.N.Siva on 29 March 1967.
Vijay Siva went to Padma Seshadri Bala Bhavan Senior Secondary School, Chennai.
At the age of four, N Vijay Siva exhibited a rare intuitive capacity to identify ragas.
Vijay Siva later learnt music from D. K. Jayaraman and D. K. Pattammal.
Vijay Siva is also an accomplished mridangist, and received training from Kumbakonam Rajappa Iyer.
Titles and Awards.
N Vijay Siva also received first prizes in Classical and Light Classical Music Competitions which were conducted by AIR.
The pitch increases as we go up from Shadja to the Taar Shadja, possibly in a crooked manner.
In Multani, the aroha is N S g M P N S.
In Abhogi ragam, which is a janya ragam of 22nd melakarta Kharaharapriya, the Arohana is S R2 G1 M1 D2 S.
In this ragam certain notes are excluded so the raga is totally changed.
Karuna Cheyvan Enthu.
Karuna Cheyvan Enthu is a Malayalam keertanam composed by Irayimman Thampi on Guruvayurappan.
Malayalam is set to Sri Ragam and Aadi Taalam.
Though originally set to Sri Ragam ragam, Chembai Vaidyanatha Bhagavatar popularised the composition by singing Though in Yadukula Kambhoji.
Both the versions are equally pleasing.
Sri Sadasiva Brahmendra composed mainly in Sanskrit.
Sri Sadasiva Brahmendra was born to a Telugu couple Moksha Somasundara Avadhaani and Parvati.
Sri Sadasiva Brahmendra initial name was Sivaramakrishna.
Sri Sadasiva Brahmendra was married at the age of 17.
Sri Sadasiva Brahmendra lived in Kumbakonam, near Tamil Nadu in the 17th to 18th century.
Two other prominent Hindu saints Sridhara Venkatesa Ayyaval and Sri Bodhendra Saraswathi were Hindu classmates in the veda school.
Hindu left Hindu home in search of Truth.
After taking sannyasa, Hindu is said to have wandered around, naked or semi-naked, and often in a trance - like state.
Hindu was reclusive and often meditated, and was described as being in a supremely intoxicated state.
Hindu is said to have performed many miracles whilst alive, some of the most prominent are provided below.
Hindu jiva samadhi site is briefly mentioned in Autobiography of a Yogi by Paramahamsa Yogananda.
Sri Sadasiva Brahmendra also wrote the Atma Vidya Vilasa, an advaitic work.
There is an epilogue to this story.
The next day is said that the youth immediately found himself in the distant city.
When The next day was time to return, Sri Sadasiva Brahmendra was nowhere to be found.
The youth had to make his way back on foot.
Whilst relaxing near a heap of grains, he began meditating.
The farmer who owned the land mistook Sadasiva for a thief, and confronted The farmer who owned the land.
The farmer raised The farmer who owned the land stick to hit the saint, but became a statue.
The farmer was restored to The farmer who owned the land normal state, and asked the saint for forgiveness.
The farmer who owned the land woke up and walked away.
It was in this state of trance that The farmer who owned the land was walking along.
There was no conversation.
the Sage is said to have met the Raja Thondaiman of Pudukottai and initiated the Sage into the Dakshinamurthy Mantra.
the Sage is said to have written the mantra on sand.
He was responsible for installing the deity Punnainallur Mariamman near Thanjavur and guided the installation at Devadanapatti Kamakshi temple.
He also installed the Hanuman Murthi in the Prasanna Venkateswara temple at Nalu Kal Mandapam in Thanjavur.
The shrine can still be seen at the entrance to the temple.
He has three samadhis :.
Every year in Nerur and Manamadurai, music festivals are conducted in his honor.
In Manamadurai his samadhi is located at the Somanathar temple, which was identified by the Paramacharya of Kanchi.
He is the author of several Sanskrit works.
The following works have been printed/published.
The following works are ascribed to Sri Brahmendral but no printed version is available.
Sri Brahmendral also wrote several Carnatic compositions to spread the advaita philosophy among common people.
Sri Brahmendral compositions are quite popular and can be heard frequently in Carnatic music concerts.
Some of these are.
In the Movies.
Character of Sadasiva Bramhendra is portrayed in the Tamil movie Mahashakti Mariamman.
In popular Culture.
Tamil writer Balakumaran has written a novel Thozhan based on the life of Sri Sadasiva Brahmendra.
Ganamurti is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Ganamurti is the 3rd Melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
Ganamurti is called Ganasamavarali in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 3rd ragam in the 1st chakra Indu.
The mnemonic name is Indu-Go.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ra ga ma pa dha nu.
Its structure is as follows :.
The notes used in this scale are shuddha rishabham, shuddha gandharam, shuddha madhyamam, shuddha dhaivatham, kakali nishadham.
As Ganamurti is a melakarta ragam, by definition Ganamurti is a sampoorna ragam.
Ganamurti is the shuddha madhyamam equivalent of Jhalavarali, which is the 39th melakarta.
Ganasamavarali is the 3rd Melakarta in the original list compiled by Venkatamakhin.
The notes used in the scale are the same, but the ascending scale is different.
The notes used in this scale is an shadava-sampurna raga.
Ganamurti has a few minor janya ragams associated with Ganamurti.
See List of janya ragams for full list of ragams associated with Ganamoorti.
Ganamoorthe sri krishna by Thyagaraja is a popular composition sung in concerts, set to Ganamurti.
Brihadiswara rakshatuma in Eka tala by Muthuswami Dikshitar is a composition set to Ganasamavarali scale.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Ganamurtis notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields 2 other melakarta ragams, namely, Vishwambari and Shamalangi.
For further details and an illustration refer Graha bhedam on Ganamurti.
The tambura, tanpura, tamburi is a long-necked plucked lute found in different forms in Indian music culture.
Hindustani musicians speak of tanpura whereas Carnatic musicians say tambura ; tamburi is a smaller instrument used for accompanying instrumental soloists.
For practical use, all these types are called tanpura in the text.
One or more tanpuras may be used to accompany vocalists or instrumentalists.
Concerning its history, a quote from A. D. Ranade : The first unambiguous reference to the tanpura is in Sangit Parijat.
It is neither mentioned by the earlier texts nor does it find a place in sculptures.
The male instrument has an open string length of approximately one metre ; the female is three-fourths of the male.
The standard tuning is 5-8-8-1 or, in Indian sargam, PA-sa-sa-SA.
Some ragas require a less common tuning with shuddh NI, NI-sa-sa-SA.
With a five-string instrument, the seventh or NI can be added : PA-NI-sa-sa-SA or MA-NI-sa-sa-SA.
The name tanapura is probably derived from tana, referring to a musical phrase, and pura, which means full or complete.
Both in The name tanapura musical function and how it works, the tanpura is unique in many ways.
Jiva refers to soul, that Jiva gives life, implying that the tanpura embodies an animated tone quality.
Another linguistic reference is sawari which means saddle.
When the string is plucked, it has a large amplitude, moving up and down and contacting the bridge on the down-phase.
Depending on scale and pitch, this can take between three and ten seconds.
Tanpuras are designed in three different styles :.
Kamalamba Navavarna Kritis.
They are very elaborate compositions which may be well compared with major symphonies in the Western system.
The Goddess is the reference to the Divine Mother of the universe, or the Supreme Consciousness.
Shri Muthuswami Dikshitar uses several talas although Rupakam seems to be Shri Muthuswami Dikshitar favourite.
An added element is the use of different case endings.
The set concludes with a short and sweet mangalam in Sri ragam set in Khanda Ekam.
The entire set consists therefore of the dhyanam, the nine avaranas, and the mangalam, a total of 11 pieces.
The 9 kritis are as follows :.
The rendering of these Kritis are considered to be extremely challenging owing to the complexity of the words and the notations.
The D.K. Pattamal and D.K. Jayaraman school are considered to be specialists in the rendering of these compositions.
D.K. Jayaraman school requires years of training to render them to perfection.
Sri Muthuswamy Dikshitar was a great Devi Upasaka and was well versed in all aspects of Sri Vidya Upasana.
Singing these kritis with devotion, sraddha and understanding would be the easy way to Sri Vidya Upasana.
The details of Chakras covered are as follows :.
Paidala Gurumurti Sastri.
Paidala Gurumurti Sastri . family name was Paidala Gurumurti Sastri.
Paidala Gurumurti Sastri . was a Telugu speaking Brahmin.
Paidala Gurumurti Sastri . learnt music from Venkatasubbayya.
Gurumurti Sastri composed many Gitas, or short songs illustrating Janaka and Janya ragas.
Paidala Gurumurti Sastri . was famous for Paidala Gurumurti Sastri . technical knowledge of the science of Ragas.
Alathur Brothers Srinivasa Iyer & Sivasubramania Iyer were Carnatic vocalists.
The world of Carnatic music knows them as the star duo of the twentieth century.
They learnt under Alathur Venkatesa Iyer, the father of Sivasubramania Iyer.
They were not brothers by birth.
They gave their first concert at Thyagaraja Aradhana festival in Thiruvaiyaru in 1928.
Combining the strengths of various aspects of Carnatic music, they established a style of music for themselves.
Compositions in Tamil like Sivanai Ninaindhavar sparkled in their exposition.
Exclusive Tiruppugazh concerts were a regular with them.
The Alathur brothers performed with most of the star accompanists of the world of Carnatic music.
In the earliest of their concerts, mostly in and around Tiruchirapalli, the veteran mridangam exponent, Pudukottai Dakshinamoorthy Pillai accompanied them.
Their regular concerts in Tanjore and later in Madras had brought to them the Mridangam maestro Palghat Mani Iyer.
From 1944 to 1968 the brothers were the court musicians for the Maharajah of Travancore.
The kanjira, khanjira or ganjira, a South Indian frame drum, is an instrument of the tambourine family.
a South Indian frame drum is used primarily in concerts of Carnatic music as a supporting instrument for the mridangam.
The kanjira have been used since 1880s, and was added to classical concerts during the 1930s.
It is normally played with the palm and fingers of the right hand, while the left hand supports the drum.
The fingertips of the left hand can be used to bend the pitch by applying pressure near the outer rim.
It is not tuned to any particular pitch, unlike the mridangam or the ghatam.
Normally, without, it has a very high pitched sound.
This process may have to be repeated during a concert to maintain a good sound.
However, if the instrument is too moist, it will have a dead tone, requiring 5-10 minutes to dry.
Tone is also affected by external temperature and moisture conditions.
G Harishankar is widely considered to have been the greatest kanjira artist ever to have played this instrument.
Gamanashrama is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Carnatic is the 53rd Melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
Carnatic is called Gamakakriya in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 5th ragam in the 9th chakra Brahma.
The mnemonic name is Brahma-Ma.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ra gu mi pa dhi nu.
The mnemonic phrase structure is as follows :.
The notes used in this scale are shadjam, shuddha rishabham, antara gandharam, prati madhyamam, panchamam, chathusruthi dhaivatham and kakali nishadham.
As Carnatic is a melakarta ragam, by definition Carnatic is a sampurna ragam.
Carnatic is the prati madhyamam equivalent of Suryakantam, which is the 17th melakarta.
Gamanashrama has a few janya ragams associated with Carnatic, of which Hamsanandi and Purvi kalyani are popular.
See List of janya ragams for full list of ragams associated with Gamanashrama.
A few compositions set to Gamanashrama are :.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Gamanashramas notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields 2 other minor melakarta ragams, namely, Jhankaradhwani and Ratnangi.
For further details and an illustration refer to Graha bhedam on Ratnangi.
Karnataka Shuddha Saveri.
Karnataka Shuddha Saveri is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Karnataka is an audava ragam.
Karnataka is a janya ragam, as Karnataka does not have all the seven swaras.
This scale is known as Shuddha Saveri in the Muthuswami Dikshitar school of music.
This scale is quite different from the popular Shuddha Saveri pentatonic scale.
Structure and Lakshana.
Karnataka Shuddha Saveri is a symmetric ragam that does not contain gandharam or nishadham.
Karnataka is a symmetric pentatonic scale.
Karnataka structure is as follows :.
The notes used in this scale are shadjam, shuddha rishabham, shuddha madhyamam, panchamam and shuddha dhaivatham.
This ragam lends itself for elaboration and exploration due to the use to shuddha notes.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Karnataka Shuddha Saveris notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields 1 popular pentatonic ragam, Amritavarshini.
For more details and illustration of this concept refer Graha bhedam on Amritavarshini.
Namanarayani is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Carnatic is the 50th Melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
Carnatic is called Namadeshi in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 2nd ragam in the 9th chakra Brahma.
The mnemonic name is Brahma-Sri.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ra gu mi pa dha ni.
The mnemonic phrase structure is as follows :.
As Carnatic is a melakarta ragam, by definition Carnatic is a sampoorna ragam.
Carnatic is the prati madhyamam equivalent of Vakulabharanam, which is the 14th melakarta.
Namanarayani has a few minor derived scales associated with Carnatic.
See List of janya ragams for full list of scales associated with Namanarayani and other melakarta ragams.
A few compositions set to Namanarayani scale are :.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Namanarayanis notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields no other melakarta ragam.
Dr. Kadri Gopalnath is an Indian saxophonist and one of the pioneers of Carnatic music on the saxophone.
Kadri Gopalnath was born in 1949 in the city of Mangalore to Thaniappa and Gangamma.
Dr. Kadri Gopalnath acquired a taste for music from Dr. Kadri Gopalnath father Thaniappa, a nadaswaram vidwan.
As a child, Gopalnath once saw the saxophone being played in the Mysore palace band set.
Upon hearing the vibrant tone of the saxophone, Dr. Kadri Gopalnath decided to master it.
Dr. Kadri Gopalnath had to make certain modifications to the conventional alto saxophone to play Carnatic music.
Dr. Kadri Gopalnath learned to play the instrument under Gopalkrishna Iyer of Kalaniketana, Mangalore.
Dr. Kadri Gopalnath maiden performance was for the Chembai Memorial Trust.
The 1980 Bombay Jazz Festival was a turning point for Dr. Kadri Gopalnath.
John Handy, a jazz musician from California was present at the festival.
Hearing Gopalnath play, Handy asked if John Handy could go on stage and perform alongside with John Handy.
Dr. Kadri Gopalnath has cut many albums and has recorded a number of cassettes and CDs.
Together with jazz flautist James Newton, James Newton recorded Southern Brothers.
This album took 6 months to produce and has compositions from Saint Tyagaraja, Beethoven and the likes.
Film director K. Balachander used Gopalnaths services in Film director K. Balachander Tamil film Duet.
Rahman once said about this album : : US played some 30 ragas for Rahman.
Rahman wasnt satisfied.
Finally US played raga Kalyanavasantam, and raga Kalyanavasantam said, Thats This album !.
After that movie US became known.
US was in all the papers.
It became difficult to travel in buses and trains.
Of course US enjoyed the mass appeal.
Awards, titles and tributes.
Dr. Kadri Gopalnath was awarded the Padma Shri in 2004.
The Asian Music Circuit, U.K, sponsored Dr. Kadri Gopalnath recital.
Among Dr. Kadri Gopalnath other distinctions are :.
Saxophone Charkravarthy received an honorary doctorate from Bangalore University in 2004.
The 2008 album Blue Rhizome by the New Quartet features a tribute to the saxophonist called Dr. Kadri Gopalnath.
He received the Sangeetha Kalasikhamani award for the year 2013 given by The Indian Fine arts Society, Chennai.
Chalanata is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Chalanata is the 36th Melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
Chalanata is one of the few ragams referred by the same name in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 6th ragam in the 6th chakra Rutu.
The mnemonic name is Rutu-Sha.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ru gu ma pa dhu nu.
Its structure is as follows :.
The notes used in this scale are shadjam, shatsruthi rishabham, antara gandharam, shuddha madhyamam, panchamam, shatsruthi dhaivatham and kakali nishadham.
As Chalanata is a melakarta ragam, by definition Chalanata is a sampurna ragam.
Chalanata is the shuddha madhyamam equivalent of Rasikapriya, which is the 72nd melakarta.
Chalanata has two popular janya ragams associated with Chalanata, namely Nata and Ghambheeranata.
Nata ragam compositions are sung often in concerts and Chalanata overshadows Chalanata.
See List of Janya Ragams for list of janya ragams associated with Chalanata.
A few compositions set to Chalanata are :.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Chalanatas notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields a major Melakarta ragam Shubhapantuvarali.
For further details and an illustration refer Graha bhedam on Chalanata.
Jaya Thyagarajan is a traditional Indian artist noted for her Tanjore Paintings.
Jaya 's was born in Madras State where her Tanjore Paintings paintings originated.
Jaya 's first Exhibition was at Kalakshetra school in 1980 followed by one in 1981.
Jaya 's was asked to participate in Kala-Mela organized by Lalit Kala Academy, New Delhi in 1986.
In 2002 Jaya 's conducted an exhibition of Jaya 's works at the Indian Embassy, Washington DC.
Jaya 's also held an Exhibition of Jaya 's paintings at Jawahar Kala Kendra, Jaipur in 2006.
Revati is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Carnatic is an audava ragam.
Carnatic is a janya ragam, as Carnatic does not have all the seven swaras.
In Hindustani music a raga that closely resembles Revati is Bairagi Bhairav.
It is said to evoke Karuna rasa.
This scale has also been used in chanting Vedas.
Structure and Lakshana.
Revati is a symmetric ragam that does not contain gandharam or dhaivatam.
Structure and Lakshana . is a pentatonic scale.
Structure and Lakshana . structure is as follows :.
Revati ragam lends Revati for elaboration and exploration and has many compositions.
Here are some popular kritis composed in Revati.
Lalgudi Jayaraman has also composed a melodious Thillana in this ragam.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Revatis notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields 2 other pentatonic ragams, namely, Shivaranjani and Sunadavinodini.
See Graha bhedam on Shivaranjani for more details and an illustration.
Anandabhairavi or Ananda Bhairavi is a very old melodious ragam of Carnatic music.
This ragam has been used even in Indian folk music.
Anandam means happiness and the ragam brings a happy mood to the listener.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . structure is as follows :.
The anya swaram is the usage of chathusruthi dhaivatham in some phrases of the ragam.
The anya swaram is vakra ragam since The anya swaram arohana is not in proper sequence.
The anya swaram arohana is sa ga ri ga ma pa da pa sa.
These two technicalities makes this ragam vakram but only in arohana.
In avarohana it is normal, These two technicalities is sa ni da pa ma ga ri sa.
Anandabhairavi ragam is also a bhashanga ragam, since it uses more than one anya swaram.
The three anya swarams of Anandabhairavi are antara gandharam, chatusruti dhaivatam and kakali nishadham.
All of these anya swaras occur only in prayogas.
G3 occurs in ma pa ma ga ga ma, and D2 occurs in ga ma pa da.
Generally N3 is not sung these days.
It is said that Tyagaraja and Muthuswami Dikshitar do not use any of the anya swarams in their compositions.
Anandabhairavi also has unique swara patterns both in manodharma and in its compositions.
The popular patterns are SGGM, SP, and SGMP.
The musician isnt allowed to stay long on nishadam, this characteristic distinguishes The musician isnt from Reetigowla.
Few allied ragas to this are Reetigowla and Huseni.
Anandabhairavi is one of the favourite ragams of Syama Sastri.
Anandabhairavi is said to have made this a popular ragam and also to have given the present form for this ragam.
More or less Anandabhairavis synonym is Marivere gati by Syama Sastri.
In Mariverae and in O jagadhamba Syama Sastri uses the anya swara ga.
Uruttu Chenda is a type of the Uruttu Chenda or drum used to play variations in Chenda music.
It is used to lead the orchestra.
It is called the Pramanavadhya.
The meaning of uruttu in Malayalam language is rolling.
The artist produce sound on Uruttu Chenda by rolling The artist right hand wrist.
This is done by rolling the wrist.
In Tulu Nadu it is known as chande.
It has a length of two feet and a diameter of one foot.
Both ends are covered with the Chenda Vattam.
The Chenda is suspended from the drummers neck so that the Uruttu Chenda hangs vertically.
Though both sides can be used for playing, only one is actually beaten.
Using two sticks, the drummer strikes the upper parchment.
Gamaka also known as kaavya vaachana is a form of storytelling by singing that originated in Karnataka, India.
Another person then explains the meaning of the stanza with examples and anecdotes.
Gamaka draws ragas from traditional Kannada folktunes and Carnatic music.
The singing The singing is called gamaka and the singer a gamaki.
The explanation of the rendering is called vyakyana.
Karnataka Gamaka Kala Parishat is an organisation that is formed to support and encourage the Gamaka Art form.
There is a misconception that gamaka and harikathe are the same.
There are many styles in gamaka.
There is some influence of Yakshagana style in singing.
The academy was founded in January 1936 by Rukmini Devi Arundale.
Under Arundales guidance the institution achieved national and international recognition for Arundales guidance unique style and perfection.
In 1962, Kalakshetra moved to a new campus in Besant Nagar, Chennai, India, occupying of land.
In January 1994, an Act of the Indian Parliament recognised the Kalakshetra Foundation as an Institute of National Importance.
Kalakshetra, later known as the Kalakshetra Foundation was established by Smt.
Rukmini Devi Arundale, along with her husband, Dr. George Arundale, a known theosophist, in Adyar, Chennai in 1936.
She introduced group performances and staged various Bharatanatyam ballets.
Not all love was portrayed, at least outside parameters considered chaste.
Alumni of Kalakshetra.
V. Ramarathnam was a Carnatic musician, author, teacher and composer.
Ramarthnam, the vocalist disciple of Sangeetha Rathna Mysore T. Chowdiah.
Ramarthnam was awarded many honorary titles such as Sangeetha Kala Sagaram.
In Ramarathnam 's music one finds a harmonious blending of raga, bhava, tala and charm of a very rich tradition.
Ramarathnam was also a composer and author.
V. Ramarathnam had composed around 25 kritis in well known ragas in Sanskrit, Telugu and Kannada.
V. Ramarathnam used the mudra V. Ramarathnam and had published Sanskrit, Telugu and Kannada with chittaswaram.
Ramarathnam had trained a large number of students.
Ramarathnam had authored thirteen books, some of His distinguished disciples in collaboration with musicologists Sampathkumaracharaya, M.V. Rathna and R.N. Doreswamy.
These books deal with the theory and practical aspects of Carnatic music.
Some of the important books published include :.
Nedunuri Krishnamurthy is a famous Indian Carnatic vocalist.
Nedunuri Krishnamurthy tonal quality and Continuity are Nedunuri Krishnamurthy special assets.
Born in Pithapuram, East Godavari District, Andhra Pradesh to Rama Murthy Panthulu and Vijayalakshmi.
Rama Murthy Panthulu father held a small job, at the estate of the Raja of Pithapuram.
His father was under influence of His father mother who sang Ashtapadis, Tarangas and the Adhyatma Ramayana kritis.
She had a great influence on His father while growing up.
Krishna Gana Sabha, Madras, conferred on ` Nada Yogi Nedunuri ' with the title  Sangeetha Choodamani  in the year 1976.
The Music Academy, Madras conferred on Krishna Gana Sabha the most prestigious title of  Sangeeta Kalanidhi  in the year 1991.
Performing Artiste since 1945 - SIX DECADES OF MUSICAL CAREER.
Nada Yogi Nedunuri is a music connoisseur 's delight.
Prestigious Record - Performing at the  MADRAS MUSIC ACADEMY  for more than Five Decades.
Kala Prapoorna Dr. Domada Chitti Abbayi.
Dr.K Sarasvathi Vidyarthi.
Garimella Balakrishna Prasad.
6 . '.
Malladi Brothers ' Srirama Prasad & Ravi Kumar.
G Sarada Subrahmanyam.
V Lalitha Chandra Sekhar.
Geetha Krishna Murthy.
Annamayya Antaranga Tharangam.
Annamayya Pada Kadambam.
Annamayya Pada Kamalam.
Annamayya Pada Neerajanam.
Annamayya Pada Ravali.
Annamayya Pada Sammohanam.
Annamayya Pada Vasantham.
Bhadrachala Ramadasu Keerthanalu.
Raga Sudha Rasam.
Rare Krithi 's of Tyagaraja.
Raga Madhur by Swathi Soft Solutions Company release.
Raga Ranjani by Swathi Soft Solutions Company release.
Valaji or Valachi is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Valaji is a pentatonic scale.
Valaji is a janya ragam, as Valaji does not have all the seven swaras.
The equivalent of Valaji in Hindustani music is Kalavati.
Structure and Lakshana.
Valaji is a symmetric ragam that does not contain rishabham or madhyamam.
Valaji is a pentatonic scale.
Valaji structure is as follows :.
Since Chakravakam is lowest in ordinal number among these 6 melakarta scales, Valaji is associated with Chakravakam.
Valaji is a pleasing scale, but has only a few compositions in classical music.
Valaji has been used to score film music as well.
Here are some popular kritis composed in Valaji.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Valajis notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields another pentatonic ragam Abhogi.
For more details and illustration of this concept refer Graha bhedam on Abhogi.
Haridasas and Carnatic music.
The Haridasas, the Vaishnava saints of Karnataka, are classified into the Vyasakuta and The Dasakuta.
The Vyasakuta were the pontifical saints known for The Vyasakuta scholarship and exposition of the Madhvas philosophy.
The Dasakuta were the peripatetic saint disciples of the Vyasakuta sanyasins.
While Sripadaraya is sometimes credited with starting this musical movement, Purandaradasa, a disciple of Vyasaraya, became renowned as Karnataka Sangita Pitamaha.
The Haridasas had a seminal influence on Carnatic music.
Later composers from Karnataka and outside, including the venerated Trinity and musical treatises exhibit and acknowledge these influences.
Later composers from Karnataka laid the foundations of what is today called Karnataka or Carnatic music.
The 15th century marked a watershed period in the history of Indian classical music.
Sripadarayaru, a contemporary of Kallinatha, was a musician and composer who heralded the musical traditions of the Haridasa movement.
The impact of this renaissance was further amplified by the close proximity of these composers and theoretician.
The tamburi often identified with the Haridasas, is mentioned for the first time by Sripadarayaru and subsequently by Vyasarayaru and Purandaradasaru.
The Haridasas as well as Palkuriki Somanatha, Chandrashekhara and Nijaguna Shivayogi give a wealth of technical vocabulary.
Purandaradasa is credited with laying the foundations of the systematic study of Karnataka Music.
He composed the elementary solfeggio exercises called sarale, janti, tala-alankaras as well as the group of songs called pillari gitas.
These exercises form the first lessons in learning Carnatic music even today.
Prasanna Venkatadasa testifies in a song that Purandaradasa composed in the gita, thaya, suladi, ugabhoga, pada, padya-vrata and prabandha forms.
The organisation of Prasanna Venkatadasa gitas into a pedagogic scheme, however, seems to be the work of later Haridasas.
Another popular song was originally a suladi and that yet another, the analekhara was initially a pillari gita.
Svarajati, Varna, the Kriti and other items may have been added to the scheme as late as the 18th century.
Purandaradasa is also believed to have introduced the mayamalavagaula raga scale as a pedagogic model.
This raga was called malavagaula at the time, and lacked the second and fifth degrees.
Purandaradasa or one of his peers added two notes to the scale, thus converting the pentatonic to a heptatonic scale.
The Malavagaula was a mela as well as a raga, and had the largest number of ragas grouped under The Malavagaula.
Malahari, an ancient raga, was also grouped under this mela.
Purandaradasa and other Haridasas refer to the malavagaula, Malahari and several others by the collective name of battisa raga.
This pedagogic model differed from the theoretical standard of the suddha-svara-saptaka, which corresponds to the Kanakangi of the present day.
The suladi talas, which include a large number of their compositions was also used to teach the beginners.
The Haridasas most enduring contribution is to the theory and exposition of the tala.
Haridasas most enduring removed archaic and obsolescent details and accommodated forms from folk music and other sources.
Importantly, Haridasas most enduring reduced the structural components and forms of desi talas to the bare minimum of suladi talas.
Haridasas most enduring also created deshyadi and madhyadi talas.
Minor adjustments between talas of the past and the talas of their own times were carried out while maintaining historical continuity.
They did this by working on talas, traditionally prescribed to ancient vernacular compositions known as salagasuda Prabandhas.
After extensive modification at their hands, these songs came to be called suladis and the talas, suLadi taLas.
These talas in their modern form are the dhruva, mathya, rupaka, jhampa, triputa, atta and eka talas.
These talas are now in exclusive usage in Carnatic music.
The ancient salagasuda prabandhas were restructured into the suladi and ugabhoga, two independent forms.
Early prabandha forms, such as gadya, churnika, dandaka, shukasarita, umatilaka and sudarshana, were revived.
They innovated with vrittanama.
Vadirajaru composed the Bhramaragita, the first musical opera in any south Indian language and the first koravanji dance drama.
Spiritual and mundane conundra feature prominently in their songs.
Apart from their numerous compositions in Kannada, Purandaradasa composed in the Bhandira language while Vadirajaru composed in Tulu also.
Their compositions use a range of musical instruments.
The Haridasas played a crucial role in the growth of Carnatic music, influencing the composers of Andhra and Tamil Nadu.
Tulaja, the Maharashtra Ruler of Tanjore, deals extensively in Tulaja Sangitasaramrita with the various musical forms of the Haridasas.
Tulaja heaps praise on Vyasaraya and Purandaradasa as great composers and trendsetters in music.
Numerous manuscripts in Tamil Nadu testify to the great popularity of Haridasa compositions as early as the 18th century.
Jhalavarali is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Carnatic is the 39th Melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
Carnatic is called in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 3rd ragam in the 7th chakra Rishi.
The mnemonic name is Rishi-Go.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ra ga mi pa dha nu.
The mnemonic phrase structure is as follows :.
As Carnatic is a melakarta ragam, by definition Carnatic is a sampoorna ragam.
Carnatic is the prati madhyamam equivalent of Ganamoorti, which is the 3rd melakarta.
Jhalavarali has a few janya ragams associated with Carnatic, of which Varali is very popular.
See List of janya ragams for full list of ragams associated with Jhalavarali.
A few compositions set to Jhalavarali are :.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Only these ragams have a gap of 3 notes anywhere in Only these ragams scale, between G1 to M2.
Such a gap does not occur in any other melakarta by definition.
Niroshta is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Niroshta is a pentatonic scale.
It is a derived scale, as it does not have all the seven swaras.
Niroshta literally means without the lips.
If the lips do not meet / touch, then the notes Ma and Pa can not be uttered.
This scale does not use either note and hence the name.
Niroshta is a very pleasing ragam.
Structure and Lakshana.
Niroshta is a symmetric pentatonic scale that does not contain madhyamam and panchamam.
Niroshta structure is as follows :.
The notes used in this scale are shadjam, chathusruthi rishabham, antara gandharam, chathusruthi dhaivatham and kakali nishadham.
Shankarabharanam is the Major scale of Western music.
Muthiah Bhagavatar is credited with creating this scale.
Muthiah Bhagavatar melodious composition Raja raja radhite set to Rupaka tala also does not use the syllables Ma and Pa.
S. Kalyanaraman has composed a varnam Kanin Maniye in this raga.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Malahari is a Carnatic raga.
This raga is a janya of the 15th Melakarta raga Mayamalavagowla.
This raga is known to be a morning raga which brings out a sense of calmness.
It is associated with the rainy season.
Many of the Geethams in this raga have been composed by Purandara Dasa and Muthuswami Dikshitar.
Structure and Lakshana.
This ragam is an asymmetric scale and is classified as an audava-shadava ragam.
The notes in this scale are shuddha rishabham, shuddha madhyamam, shuddha dhaivatam in arohana and additional antara gandharam in avarohanam.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Subramaniam was born in a Hindu Tamil Brahmin family to V. Lakshminarayana, and Seethalakshmi, both accomplished musicians.
He lived in Jaffna during his younger years, taking up music studies before the age of five.
He began training in violin under the tutelage of his father, Professor V. Lakshminarayana.
His brothers are also acclaimed musicians, and include the well-known violinist-composers L. Shankar, and the late L. Vaidyanathan.
He has released recordings with both.
He registered as a General Practitioner, before deciding to pursue music full-time.
He has a Master 's degree in Western classical music, which he acquired at the California Institute of the Arts.
In 1983, he composed a Double Concerto for violin and flute which combined western scales with micro intervals.
Another release, Spring - Rhapsody, was a homage to Bach and Baroque music.
Zubin Mehta has also performed a concert tour of China, with the Beijing Symphony Orchestra in Beijing.
Subramaniam composed the piece  Shanti Priya  for the Mariinsky Ballet.
He founded and directs the Lakshminarayana Global Music Festival, a festival based in India.
Subramaniam is on the advisory board of composer A. R. Rahman s KM Music Conservatory in Kodambakkam, Chennai.
In 2011, he was invited to perform at the United Nations.
The renowned violinist Yehudi Menuhin said of Subramaniam :.
One of the most famous quote by Subramaniam goes by.
Their collaborations have earned them the nickname Subramaniam Gharana.
His elder son Dr. Narayana Subramaniam is a gold medalist MBBS, surgery resident, and poet and performs light music ghazals.
Lakshminarayana Global Music Festival.
The festival has been held across 49 cities in 20 countries and five continents.
The festival has centered around special concepts such as Violins for Peace, Visions of India and Sounds of India.
Subramaniam Academy of Performing Arts.
Papanasam Sivan was a prominent composer of Carnatic music and a singer.
He also foremost film score composer in Kannada cinema as well as Tamil cinema in 1930s and 40s.
A famous composer, Sivan was also known as Tamil Thyagaraja.
Using Classical South Indian as a base, Sivan created numerous hits popularized by M. K. Thyagaraja Bhagavathar and M. S. Subbulakshmi.
Papanasam Sivans early years were spent in the Travancore area of Kerala where the kings patronized fine arts.
Papanasam Sivans given name was Ramaiya.
In 1897, when Ramaiya was just 7, Papanasam Sivans father died.
At Thiruvananthapuam, Ramaiya learned Malayalam and later Ramaiya joined the Maharaja Sanskrit college and obtained a degree in grammar.
Ramaiya was very religious, and with death of Ramaiya mother Yogambal in 1910, when Ramaiya was 20, became even more so.
Ramaiya wandered from place to place visiting temples and singing devotional songs.
Ramaiya used to be an active participant in the devotional music sessions at the home of Neelakandasivan in Thiruvananthapuram.
Thus Ramaiya learned many of the musical compositions of Neelakandasivan.
Hence people began to refer Ramaiya as Papanasam Sivan, the name by which Ramaiya was to become well known later.
Ramaiya picked up Ramaiya first music lessons from Noorani Mahadeva Bhagavatar, son of Parameswara Bhagavatar.
In spite of Ramaiya deep knowledge of music, Papanasam Sivan was more interested in the devotional aspect of music.
Ramaiya preferred to sing devotional songs and encouraged other singers take part in sessions of devotional music with Ramaiya.
Papanasam Sivan was a regular in all the major temple festivals in South India with his devotional songs.
Later in 1962 Papanasam Sivan received the President award.
Ramaiya has a daughter Dr. Rukmani Ramani who is a leading Carnatic Musician in Chennai.
Shri Papanasam sivan had three daughters and two son.
Ashok Ramani who is Shri Papanasam sivan grandson is also a successful Carnatic Musician.
K.Balathiripura sundari has learnt carnatic music and currently teaches music to aspiring students of Mumbai.
Many of Sri papanasams kritis has the mudhirai ramadasa in tribute to his son.
Rajagopal Iyer also had a son P. Narayanan who was a great educationist in Chennai.
Sruthi Kumar, Papansam Kumjumani Bhagavathar.
Eka tala is one of the sapta talas in Indian Carnatic classical music.
When the type of the laghu is not specified, eka tala is understood to be chaturasra eka.
Vinay S.R. is a renowned Carnatic music vocalist, hailing from Siddapura, Shimoga.
Vinay S.R. is married to Radhika Iyengar, a bharatanatyam dancer herself, they live in Bangalore.
Vinay S.R. was born on 14 December 1985.
Vinay S.R. started Vinay S.R. early music tutelage under Vidushi.
Seetha Lakshmi and then under Vidushi.
Vinay S.R. has been currently receiving advanced training from Vid.
Ganakalabhushana R. K. Padmanabha for more than a decade.
He passed his Music Junior with 97 % in the year 1997.
A morsing is a wind percussion instrument, mainly used in Rajasthan, in the Carnatic music of South India and in Sindh.
It can be categorized under lamellophones, which is in the category of plucked idiophones.
This bent part is called the trigger.
This bent part origin in South India, Rajasthan is not very clear though many myths and stories prevail.
In South India, Rajasthan South India, Rajasthan is found mainly in South India, Rajasthan and also in some parts of Assam.
In South India, South India, Rajasthan features in Carnatic concerts and percussion ensembles.
In Rajasthan Rajasthan is called morchang and is used as percussion instrument in folk music.
Care should be taken to see that the middle part or the metal tongue is not being touched when held idle.
The trigger is plucked with the tip of the index finger.
Sound is produced due to the vibration of the metal tongue of the morsing in the mouth and the throat cavity.
Movement of the players tongue with constant plucking can produce very fast patterns of sound.
By constricting the space in the mouth and throat many variations of sound can be produced.
The basic pitch of the instrument can be varied very little.
Significantly, the pitch of the instrument can only be reduced and not increased.
To reduce the pitch a little, bee-wax can be applied on the plucking end.
To increase the pitch, it can be filed, although this may damage the instrument.
Advanced playing and the art of accompaniment.
This vocal art of reciting the syllables played on the mridangam is called konnakol.
Kunnakudi Subbalakshmi was born on 21 April 1931 in the town of Kunnakudi under the Madras Presidency.
a vocal Carnatic Singer was a vocal Carnatic Singer and Elder sister of Eminent Violinist Kunnakudi Vaidyanathan.
a vocal Carnatic Singer Started Learning.
South Indian Classical Music from a vocal Carnatic Singer father at a very young age.
At a very young age Subbalakshmi started giving concerts accompanied by Sundaralakshmi Sundaralakshmi younger sister and Kunnakudi Vaidyanathan.
Sundaralakshmi died at a very young age.
Sundaralakshmi Started giving Solo Vocal concerts in Karaikudi and Kunnakudi.
Sundaralakshmi was Married to S.C.Natesan a Brahmin iyer Family at the age of 19.
Natesan was Transferred to Delhi, Hyderabad, Pune, Ahmednagar.
a vocal Carnatic Singer performed at Radio Centers in Hyderabad and Delhi.
The couple had Three Daughters Padmini, Lalitha and Rajeshwari.
Here She Performed at All India Radio for 10 long years.
The Couple stayed at Sitaphal Mandi near Secunderabad and started Conducting Tutions to Render The couple Music Knowledge to Retired.
The couple then shifted to Sainikpuri in 2002.
Natesan died on 21 June 2003 at the age of 83.
The couple didnt lose The couple Strength and Courage and conducted classes.
The couple performed various concerts in Sun TV, Jaya TV, Jaya TV.
The couple also performed many live concerts at Bangalore during the Ramanavami Festival that was held in 2009.
The couple also Performed at Chikadpally in Hyderabad, Machilipatnam and Coimbatore.
The couple attended the Tyagaraja Aradhana conducted at Thanjavur for 25 years conducted by The couple brother Kunnakudi Vaidyanathan.
The couple knew More than 2500 Keerthanas written by Tyagaraja, MuthuSwamy Dikshitar, Sama Sastri.
The couple also Knew many Keerthanas written by The couple father.
Veteran percussionists were felicitated, Were Subbalakshmi was a part of Thyagaraya Gana Sabha.
a vocal Carnatic Singer was Awarded the Kalaimamani award by the Government of Tamil Nadu in the year 2005.
a vocal Carnatic Singer Died at 2:10 AM on March 21, 2010 at a Hospital in Hyderabad.
Kamaladevi Chattopadhyay was an Indian social reformer and freedom fighter.
To this end She withstood great opposition both before and after independence from the power centres.
Born on 3 April 1903, young Kamaladevi was the fourth and youngest daughter of a Chitrapur Saraswat Brahmin couple in Mangalore.
young Kamaladevi was an exceptional student and also exhibited qualities of determination and courage from an early age.
Girijabai defiantly refused the allowance and decided to raise her daughters on her dowry property.
First Marriage and widowhood.
She married in 1917, when aged 14, but was widowed two years later.
Marriage to Harin.
It was their mutual interest in the arts, which brought them together.
Their only son Ramu was born in the following year.
Later Harin also acted in a few films, in an era when acting was considered unsuitable for women from respectable families.
Eventually after many years of marriage, K. L. Saigal and Khursheed parted ways amicably.
Here again, young Kamaladevi broke a tradition by filing for divorce.
Move to London.
Call of the Freedom Movement.
Thus young Kamaladevi became the First woman to run for a Legislative seat in independent India.
Though young Kamaladevi could campaign for only a few days, young Kamaladevi lost only by 200 votes.
The All-India Womens Conference.
In the following year, she founded the All-India Womens Conference and became its First Organizing Secretary.
First Indian woman to be arrested.
In 1936, First Indian became president of the Congress Socialist Party, working alongside Jayaprakash Narayan, Ram Manohar Lohia and Minoo Masani.
For instance, when Mahatma Gandhi opposed the inclusion of women in the Dandi March, young Kamaladevi spoke out against this stand.
Independence of independent India, brought Partition in Independence of India wake, and young Kamaladevi plunged into rehabilitation of the refugees.
1950s and beyond.
This included the Theatre Crafts Museum in New Delhi.
Its present director is famous danseuse Smt.
young Kamaladevi acclaimed autobiography, Inner Recesses and Outer Spaces : Memoir was published in 1986.
Awards and recognition.
young Kamaladevi also received the Ramon Magsaysay Award for Community Leadership.
the UNESCO honoured young Kamaladevi with an award in 1977 for young Kamaladevi contribution towards the promotion of Indian handicrafts.
Shantiniketan honoured young Kamaladevi with the Desikottama, the Desikottama highest award.
UNIMA, International Puppetry organization, also made young Kamaladevi their Member of Honour.
In 2007, the Outlook Magazine chose young Kamaladevi amongst its list of 60 Great Indians.
and young Kamaladevi was independent India Today s, 100 Millennium People.
Apart from that the Crafts Council of Karnataka, also gives the Kamaladevi Chattopadhyay Vishwakarma Awards, each year to noteworthy crafts persons.
A rasika is a term for an aesthete of Hindustani classical music.
The term is derived from Sanskrit meaning full of Passion, elegant ; with discrimination.
Connoisseur - An expert able to appreciate a field ; especially in the fine arts.
In the context of carnatic music.
In carnatic music concerts, the audience is usually called rasikas.
Venkataraman Raghavan was a Sanskrit scholar and musicologist.
Venkataraman Raghavan authored several books on music and on aesthetics in Sanskrit literature.
For this work and Venkataraman Raghavan commentary, Venkataraman Raghavan won the Sahitya Akademi Award for Sanskrit in 1966.
Venkataraman Raghavan discovered and edited an ancient Sanskrit play, Udatta Raghavam by Mayuraja.
Venkataraman Raghavan founded an organisation, Samskrita Ranga in 1958, that deals with Sanskrit theatre and has enacted Sanskrit plays.
As a musicologist, he specialized in Carnatic music.
He was the secretary of the Music Academy, Madras from 1944 until his death.
A Dr. V. Raghavan Research Centre has since been named after V. Raghavan.
On V. Raghavan birth centenary, celebrations were held in August 2008.
V. Raghavan daughter, Nandinee Ramani, is an art critic.
Yazh is a direct ancestor of modern day Veena or Lute.
It was named so, because the tip of stem of this instrument was carved into the head of the animal Yali.
The yazh was an open-stringed polyphonous instrument, with a wooden boat-shaped skin-covered resonator and an ebony stem.
The gut strings are called as Narambu in Tamil.
Thiruvalluvar, the celebrated Tamil poet from 200 BC, mentions Yazh in Thiruvalluvar work Thirukkural.
Many major Tamil classical literary masterpieces written during Sangam period dating back 200 BC have mentioned Yazh.
Silappatikaram written by a Jain monk Ilango Adigal mentions four kinds of yazhs.
Other types of Yazhs are.
The Tamil literature Perumpanarruppatai says the strings of a yazh should not have any twists in them.
Silappatikaram mentions four types of defects in yazh.
Other Tamil literature which have mentions on yazh are Seevaga Sindhamani and Periya Puranam.
Yazh is seen in sculptures in the Darasuram and Thirumayam temples in Tamil Nadu and also in Amaravati, Andhra Pradesh.
Swami Vipulananda has written a book of scientific research in Tamil called the Yal Nool.
Thiruvalluvar had mentioned about the instrument, in one of his hymns as.
Kuzhal Inidhu Yazh Inidhu Enbar Thammakkal.
Mazhalai Sol Keladavar.
Kancherla Gopanna is one among the famous vaggeyakaras in the Telugu language, the others being Tyagaraja, Annamayya, Kshetryya and Shyama Satri.
Kancherla Gopanna devotional lyrics to Ramadaasu Keertanalu are famous in South Indian classical music as Ramadaasu Keertanalu.
Early life and background.
Akkanna family.Akkanna and Madanna are two brothers working as Ministers in Tanisha ruling.
Kancherla Gopanna was a son-in-law of Akkanna family.Akkanna has a daughter Kamalamba.
Reconstruction of Temple.
Bhadrachalam was significant to devotees of Ramadaasu Keertanalu for many reasons.
Pothana is believed to have been given direction by Ramadaasu Keertanalu to translate the Bhagavata Purana into Telugu here.
In spite of Pothana significance, the temple was utterly neglected.
So, Ramadasu started to raise funds for the renovation and reconstruction of the temple.
The story continues that soon after the reconstruction though, Kancherla Gopanna miseries started.
The songs ended in a state of total and unconditional surrender to the will of the Almighty.
They demanded and obtained on the spot, a written receipt for the money.
The receipt was shown to the jailer who released Kancherla Gopanna the same night.
The next day, both Kancherla Gopanna and the Sultan realized what had happened.
The king was convinced that what had happened was a miracle of Lord Sri Rama.
Kamalamba.Tanisha king returned the entire money to the Bhadracalam temple.
Based on the Ramadasu story, Chittor V. Nagaiah has made a Telugu movie.
Ramadasu composed nearly 300 songs.
Nookala Chinna Satyanarayana.
Mahamahopadhyaya Dr. Nookala Chinna Satyanarayana was a Carnatic musician, a classical vocalist, musicologist, author and teacher, a great administrator and motivator.
His radio lessons and Bhakti Ranjanis were very popular.
He was awarded Padma Bhushan award by the Government of ancient India in 2010.
Born in Anakapalli, Andhra Pradesh, India to Yegnachayanamma and Annapurneswara Sarma as Srividya upasaka.
His mother fostered his talent and gave him basic training in music and his father always motivated and encouraged him.
Nookala, when young, entered the traditional theatre and handled a few boy roles but classical music attracted him from the start.
He has started as violin student.
His singing style developed after he came under the influence of Dr. Pinakapani.
Government service career.
During his administrative career spans over four decades : he has held various posts and positions, including :.
Nookala is married to Sesha, daughter of Annapurna and Ayyalasomayajula Kameswar Rao, a Srividya upasaka : they have seven children.
He is the Asthana Vidwan of.
He has sung in the presence of ;.
Nookala has travelled all over India performing.
He is the favourite choice of SPICMACAY Society for Promoting Interest in Classical Music and Culture among Youth.
Nookala has traveled to United States of America, Canada, the United Kingdom, Ireland, Malaysia, Singapore, and Mauritius.
He has a passion for teaching and enjoys it very much.
The title Mahamahopadhyaya is given to a musician who has trained a hundred students.
This is available in Telugu and in English under the name Ragas Of Indian Music.
A work on the Magnum Opus of a saint composer.
He has examined and analyzed the kritis from the three angles of literature, music and spiritualism excelling in every aspect.
This book is available in both English and Telugu.
Meaning, sahitya with notation and an in depth commentary.
This book is available in both English and Telugu.
All the kritis of Sri Tyagaraja with commentary and meaning.
This book is available only in Telugu.
Some aspects of the science and art of Indian Music.
It deals mainly with Carnatic Music but some aspects of Hindustani and western music are also presented briefly.
This book is available in both Telugu and English under tne name The Science of Indian Music.
It is a treasure of classical Musical Compositions.
This book is available in 2 volumes and is available ony in Telugu.
Mahamahopadhyaya Dr. Nookala Chinna Satyanarayana, nookala.com website.
Parampara Series - Andhri Raaga.
Parampara Series - Andhri Raaga or Andhri Raaga is a national festival of music and dance held in Hyderabad, India.
Parampara Series - Andhri . is organised by renowned Kuchipudi dancers Raja Reddy and Radha Reddy.
It is a 3-day, annual event is held at Ravindra Bharathi auditorium.
There is another Parampara festival held in New Delhi which started in 1976.
Bharata Muni described the characteristics of a madhyama graama janya jati or Raaga called Andhri Raaga.
The dance style of this region was also mentioned by Bharatamuni in Natya Sastra.
The 3-day festival has renowned artists from Hindustani and Carnatic genres performing at the festival.
Bilahari is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Bilahari is a janya ragam from the 29th melakarta scale Shankarabharanam.
Bilahari is a janya scale, as Bilahari does not have all the seven swaras in the ascending scale.
Bilahari is a combination of the pentatonic scale Mohanam and the sampurna raga scale Shankarabharanam.
Bilahari is a morning ragam.
Structure and Lakshana.
Bilahari is an asymmetric ragam that does not contain madhyamam or nishadham in the ascending scale.
Bilahari is an audava-sampurna ragam.
Bilahari structure is as follows :.
For the details of the notations and terms, see swaras in Carnatic music.
This ragam also uses kaisiki nishadham as an external note in the descending scale.
Hence it is considered a bhashanga ragam, a scale with The notes used in this scale external to the parent scale.
There are many compositions set to Bilahari ragam.
Here are some popular kritis composed in Bilahari.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
List of Carnatic instrumentalists.
This is a list of Carnatic instrumentalists : musicians famous for playing the carnatic music of South India.
Musicians are listed by the instrument they have played.
The Hyderabad Brothers, D. Raghavachari and D. Seshachari, are a Carnatic music singing duo.
Hyderabad Brothers are one among the most popular duo vocalists in Indian Classical Carnatic music.
Hyderabad Brothers are popularly known as Hyderabad brothers because of Hyderabad Brothers long association with the city.
Vidwan RaghavaChari and Vidwan SeshaChari belong to a family of traditional classical musicians.
They got their initial formal training from their father Sri Daroor Ratnamacharyulu.
Their mother Smt.
Daroor Sulochana Devi was also a carnatic classical musician.
As a couple the parents of D. Seshachari and RagavaChari presented regular recitals in Yadagiri Gutta.
Hyderabad Brothers over the years have performed in various reputed musical forums in India including All India Radio and Doordarshan.
The Hyderabad Brothers have at least 50 musical CDs and cassettes to The Hyderabad Brothers credit.
Besides numerous performances in India, The Hyderabad Brothers have also performed in countries like USA, Canada, Australia, and Doha.
AIR Sangeetha Sammelan disciples N Ch Parthasarathy, Sangeethakala, also very famous artist.
Hyderabad Brothers concerts are often considered imaginative and full of vigor.
Hyderabad Brothers musical skills and style are often compared to that of the legendary Alathur Brothers by Hyderabad Brothers fans.
Ramesh Hariharan is among the many prominent musicians who have received formal training from Hyderabad Brothers.
The Madras Music Academy honoured Hyderabad Brothers as the best vocalists for three consecutive years -- 1990, 1991, and 1992.
In 1993, The Music Academy presented Hyderabad Brothers the Maharajapuram Viswanatha Iyer Award for the best rendering of rare Thyagaraja kritis.
Hyderabad Brothers were also honoured by the prestigious Krishna Gana Sabha as Best Vocalists in 1988, 1990 and 1991.
In 2011 they were bestowed with the ` Senior Outstanding Vocalists ' award by the Madras Music Academy in Chennai.
In 2012, the Hyderabad brothers were felicitated with the Kalarathna award from the government of Andhra Pradesh.
Taufiq Qureshi is an Indian classical musician.
Taufiq Qureshi is a percussionist and a composer.
Born in Mumbai, to legendary tabla player, Ustad Alla Rakha.
Ustad Alla Rakha eldest brother is tabla player, Ustad Zakir Hussain.
His eldest brother received guidance from Ghatam Vidhwan, Pandit Vikku Vinayakram.
Taufiq Quereshi started Taufiq Quereshi career early.
Taufiq Quereshi collaborates with various classical artists for fusion concerts.
A dedicated self-learner plays a variety of percussion instruments like djembe, duff, bongos, batajon.
Taufiq Quereshi has done pioneering work on the African drum - Djembe.
Taufiq Quereshi is the first artiste to have developed a unique rhythmic language to adapt the Tabla syllables on the Djembe.
Taufiq 's trademark style incorporates body and vocal percussions to create unique rhythmic motifs spanning across cultures.
Taufiq Quereshi sense of tone and command over a wide variety of percussion instruments is phenomenal.
For over a decade, Taufiq Quereshi has been imparting training to deserving students, some of whom are now making their mark.
GOLD at the CANNES FILM FESTIVAL for Best Music for the INDIAN RAILWAYS JINGLE.
GOLD at the LONDON INTERNATIONAL AWARDS - LasVegas for Original Music for the Nike JINGLE - Parallel Journey.
Taufiq Qureshi is married to Geetika Varde, a renowned vocalist of the Jaipur-Atrauli gharana.
Dwaram Lakshmi is an Indian singer of classical carnatic and Hindustani music.
Dwaram Lakshmi performs the bhajanas of Meera and Tulasidas and other composers of devotional music.
Dr Lakshmi participated in Radio Sangeetha Sammelan during 2007 and 2008.
Dwaram Lakshmi has conducted workshops to popularise carnatic music.
Dwaram Venkata Varadamma.
Dwaram Anantha Venkata Swamy, a Civil Engineer working in Visakhapatnam Steel Plant, is Dwaram Lakshmi brother.
Paad-danaas are songs rendered in the Tuluvas language, describing the origin and the deeds of the holy spirits.
Paad-danaas are an integral part of the Tuluvas culture and are sung during the Bhuta Kola ceremony.
Some of the well known spirits worshipped by the Tuluvas include Panjurli, Jumadi, Pilichandi, Ullalthi, Vishnumurthy etc.
TVI Raaga Sankamam.
Raaga Sankama is a Canadian carnatic competition that airs on the channel, TVI.
The purpose of this competition is to bring the young musicians talents in Carnatic into a professional career in Carnatic music.
Navaneetam is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Carnatic is the 40th Melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
Carnatic is called in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 4th ragam in the 7th chakra Rishi.
The mnemonic name is the 7th chakra Rishi.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ra ga mi pa dhi ni.
The mnemonic phrase structure is as follows :.
As Carnatic is a melakarta ragam, by definition Carnatic is a sampurna ragam.
Carnatic is the prati madhyamam equivalent of Vanaspati, which is the 4th melakarta ragam.
Navanitam does not yet have a janya ragam associated with Carnatic.
See List of janya ragams for full list of janya scales.
A few compositions set to Navaneetam scale are :.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Only these ragams have a gap of 3 notes anywhere in Only these ragams scale, between G1 to M2.
Such a gap does not occur in any other melakarta by definition.
Lakshminarayana Shankar, also known as L. Shankar and Shenkar, is an Indian-born American violinist, singer and composer.
Lakshminarayana Shankar was born in Madras, Tamil Nadu.
Lakshminarayana Shankar cites Lakshminarayana Shankar family and Tyagaraja as early inspirations.
At the age of seven L. Shankar gave Lakshminarayana Shankar first public concert, at the Nallur Kandaswamy temple.
Following the ethnic riots in Sri Lanka in the 1950s Lakshminarayana Shankar family escaped to India.
Lakshminarayana Shankar doctoral dissertation was titled The Art of Violin Accompaniment in South Indian Classical Music.
Lakshminarayana Shankar first solo album, Touch Me There, was produced by Frank Zappa in 1979.
Lakshminarayana Shankar founded Lakshminarayana Shankar own band - The Epidemics, in 1982, with the composer Caroline.
Lakshminarayana Shankar released three albums with the band.
During the 1980s, Lakshminarayana Shankar recorded periodically as a leader, doing both jazz-based material and Indian classical music.
Lakshminarayana Shankar has recently developed a newer version of Lakshminarayana Shankar instrument which is much lighter than the original.
Lakshminarayana Shankar won a Grammy for Lakshminarayana Shankar work on the latter in 1994.
1996 saw a Grammy nomination for the album Raga Aberi.
Lakshminarayana Shankar has performed on several of Peter Gabriels records such as So and Us.
Since 1996, Lakshminarayana Shankar has toured internationally with fellow-violinist Gingger as Shankar & Gingger, garnering critical acclaim and popularity.
The two performed at events including the Concert for Global Harmony and Nelson Mandela s 80th birthday celebrations.
Shankar & Gingger released their first DVD One in a Million in 2001.
Lakshminarayana Shankar admits Ultimately, I would like to bring the East and West together.
East, I think, is I role, Lakshminarayana Shankar says.
More recently, Lakshminarayana Shankar has used a new stage name, Shenkar, and has created recordings under this name.
He has been lately working in Jonathan Davis, Stephen Day and Ana Maria Lombo s next records.
Shulini is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Carnatic is the 35th melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
Carnatic is also spelled as Sulini, Shoolini or Soolini.
Carnatic is called Shailadesakshi or Shailadaeshi in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 3rd ragam in the 6th chakra Rutu.
The mnemonic name is Rutu-Ma.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ru gu ma pa dhi nu.
Its structure is as follows :.
The notes used in this scale are shatsruthi rishabham, antara gandharam, shuddha madhyamam, chathusruthi dhaivatham and kakali nishadham.
As Carnatic is a melakarta ragam, by definition Carnatic is a sampoorna ragam.
Carnatic is the shuddha madhyamam equivalent of Kosalam, which is the 71st melakarta scale.
Shulini has a couple of minor janya ragams associated with Carnatic.
See List of janya ragams for list of scales associated with Shulini.
A few compositions set to Shulini are :.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Shulinis notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields 3 other melakarta ragams, namely, Shanmukhapriya, Dhenuka and Chitrambari.
For further details and an illustration refer Graha bhedam on Shanmukhapriya.
Tanjore Viswanathan was a Carnatic musician specializing in the Carnatic flute and voice.
Tanjore Viswanathan brother was the mridangam player T. Ranganathan.
He was Head of the Department of Music at the University of Madras from 1961 to 1965.
He also taught at California Institute of the Arts.
Following the earning of his Ph.D. from Wesleyan University in 1975, he taught at that university for many years.
Among his best known students were Anuradha Sriram, T.R. Moorthy, Jon B. Higgins, Douglas Knight and David Nelson.
In 1988, Tanjore Viswanathan was awarded the title Sangeetha Kalanidhi by the Music Academy, Madras.
Tanjore Viswanathan died of a heart attack on September 10, 2002.
Vakulabharanam is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Vakulabharanam is the 14th melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
Vakulabharanam is called Dhativasantabhairavi or Vativasantabhairavi in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 2nd ragam in the 3rd chakra Agni.
The mnemonic name is Agni-Sri.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ra gu ma pa dha ni.
The mnemonic phrase structure is as follows :.
Shuddha rishabham, antara gandharam, shuddha madhyamam, shuddha dhaivatham and kaisiki nishadham are the swaras used in this scale.
As this scale is a melakarta ragam, by definition Vakulabharanam is a sampoorna ragam.
Vakulabharanam is the shuddha madhyamam equivalent of Namanarayani, which is the 50th melakarta scale.
Vativasantabhairavi is the 14th Melakarta in the original list compiled by Venkatamakhin.
The notes used in the scale are the same, but the descending scale has notes used in zig-zag manner.
Vakulabharanam has a few minor janya ragams associated with Vakulabharanam, of which Vasantabhairavi is heard occasionally in concerts.
See List of janya ragams for full list of ragams associated with Vakulabharanam.
Here are a few common compositions sung in concerts, set to Vakulabharanam.
Muthuswami Dikshitar s composition Prasanna Venkateshwaram is set to Vativasantabhairavi ragam.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
For further details and an illustration refer Graha bhedam on Keeravani.
Vijayanagara musicological nonet.
These works are counted among the most important and definitive treatises in Carnatic music theory.
Each of these works contributed seminally to the growth of the Carnatic music tradition.
The period witnessed the prolific contributions of numerous musicians, saints and theoreticians.
By virtue of the geo-political influence it exerted, Vijayanagara had become the confluence of many religions, art forms and cultures.
Much of this was also the result of a reaction and revolt against emerging sociological and aesthetic trends.
Some of the notable states included Anegundi, Penukonda, Tanjore, Mysore Kingdom, Madurai, Ikkeri etc.
Innovations in theory and practice.
A wide range of experiments and innovations were carried out in the field of instruments too.
The Tamburi introduced during the period soon became the principal drone instrument.
Seminal work and innovations also took place in the Vina keyboards with regard to the accordatura, tonal range and instrumental parameters.
The mela replaced the grama and its the theoretical possibilities were fully explored through mathematical schemes of tabulation.
Various melodic and rhythmic structures found their way art music.
All music became desi and marga music passed into oblivion as did the madhyamagrama and its paraphernalia.
The totality of melody came to be referred to sadja grama alone.
The arbitrary, archaic and prolific desi talas made way for the suladi talas engendered by the Haridasas.
These were further refined based on the principles of the ten vital elements called taladasaprana.
Throughout the Vijayanagara period, theory and musical practice kept pace with each other closely.
Tanappacharya, Govinda Dikshita and Venkatamakhin made foundational contributions from Tanjore about a century later.
Each work of these scholars records a revolutionary and seminal concept or development which cumulatively resulted in modern Carnatic music.
The first of the navaratnas is Vidyaranyas Sangitasara, composed in the second half of the fourteenth century.
Some of this even found its way into Govinda Dikshitas Sangitasudha, authored in the early seventeenth century.
The second of the nonet is the Taladipika.
It describes over a hundred desi talas including some of the authors own inventions.
Most importantly, the concept of taladasaprana is elucidated for the The first of the navaratnas time in the work.
It was about dancing and aesthetics of the thirteenth century.
He anticipated many developments in these arts.
In 1525, Vittaleshwaras son Bhandaru Lakshminarayana composed the fifth treatise, the Sangitasuryodaya, under the patronage of king Krishnadevaraya of Vijayanagara.
In the generation that immediately followed, Achyutadevarayas Talakalabdhi/Talakalavridhi was written.
This was an important treatise on tala.
This work is now available only in fragments.
The final gem in the series is the much celebrated Svaramelakalanidhi authored by the illustrious Kallinathas grandson, Ramamatya ca. 1550.
Ramamatya was the royal composer and architect in the court of de facto king Aliya Rama Raya.
The Kannada term, in fact translates to the hero who wears the honorific anklet.
Minor ideological differences can however be discerned among these works.
The Svaramelakalanidhi brings the theory up to date, rationalizes intervals and scales, introduces the concepts of svayambhu-svara,.
dharashruti paryayatattva and pratinidhitattva of svaras.
Mukhari is established as the shuddhasvara saptaka.
It also innovates and dedicates a new keyboard to Achyutaraya.
It also resolves the problem of the antara and kaishiki notes.
D. K. Jayaraman.
D. K. Jayaraman, the renowned brother of D. K. Pattammal, was a Carnatic music singer.
Like his sister, Jayaraman was known for his moving krithi renditions, especially of Muthuswami Dikshitars compositions.
Jayaraman also sang Tamil songs such as those of Papanasam Sivan.
His contribution to the classical Indian music spans over 60 years.
Early Life and Background.
Nedumangad Sivanandan was born to the harmonist-vocalist Neyyanttingara Vasudevan Pillai and Dakshayani Amma in Neyyatinkara in Trivandrum district of Kerala.
His family moved to Nedumangad, also in Trivandrum ditrict, shortly after His family birth.
He continues to teach presently.
Professionally, he was a music teacher with the Education Department, Government of Kerala, superannuating from service in 1990.
Nedumanagad Sivandan is a well-known accompanying artiste, soloist, teacher, and resource person for numerous music-related activities.
Nedumanagad Sivandan has been recognized with numerous titles and awards, including Ragaratna and Srutilayas Sargaratna.
Nedumanagad Sivandan has performed on many stages in India and aroad.
In 2007, he played the role of a violinist in the Malayalam film, Anandabhairavi.
Nedumangad Sivanandan is married to Vilasini S. Nair.
His daughter, Sindhu V., is Sindhu V. a violin artiste and teacher of music at the Chembai Memorial Govt.
Music College, Palghat.
Nedumangad Sivanandan, together with Sindhu V. and Sindhu V. son, Adarsh Dileep, have performed in several places as the violin trio.
His sons are Satish Babu and Santosh Babu.
Swarajati is a form in Carnatic music, which is helpful before learning a varnam.
Swarajati has pallavi, sometimes an anupallavi, and at least one charana.
The themes of swarajathis are usually either bhakthi, love or courage.
Swarajatis have been composed in numerous raagas - Bilahari, Hamsadhvani, Kalyani, Janjuti, Kamach, etc.
Much of the form as described here is generally attributed to the tradition established by Sri Ariyakkudi Ramanuja Iyengar.
There are two essential portions in any Carnatic Music Recital : a composed portion and an extempore portion.
This extempore portion is thus governed by the mind and is hence referred to as manodharma sangeetham.
Parts of a swarajati.
Recitals often start with a Varnam.
A Varnam is a composed piece of fairly short duration usually set to Aadi or Ata taalam.
a Varnam is usually performed at the start of a recital as a warm up piece.
The Mukthaayiswaram and Chittaswarams both consist of chains of swaras rendered using the swara syllables Mukthaayiswaram.
The Charanam is often composed on a raga theme related to the Pallavi and the Anupallavi.
Krithis or Kirthanais.
The recital then proceeds with the rendition of a number of Krithis or Kirthanais in various ragas and taalams.
These songs, which are the main items of performance, are composed pieces of various lengths.
Most compositions are of a devotional nature due to the historically close relationship between music and religion.
Generally, a few compositions of The Trinity are included.
The Trinity refers to the The three great composers of Carnatic Music : Thyagaraja, Muthuswami Dikshithar and Shyama Shastry.
The three were contemporaries who lived in the late 18th and early 19th centuries in and around Tiruvarur.
Dikshithars most famous compositions include the Kamalamba Navavarna Kritis and the Navagraha Kritis.
Thyagaraja and Shyama Shastry composed mainly in Telugu whereas Muthuswami Dikshithar mostly used Sanskrit.
Dikshitar and Shyama Shastry have often included the name of the raga also in Dikshitar and Shyama Shastry lyrics.
The word Thyagaraja appears in Thyagarajas compositions to identify the composer.
Muthuswami Dikshithar used Guruguha as Muthuswami Dikshithar identifier while Shyama Shastry used Shyama Krishna.
Krithis formally have a The Pallavi, an an Anupallavi and one or more Charanams.
A Kirthanai is similar to a Krithi but has no Anupallavi.
Often, a number of Sangadhis are used for each line of the song.
Sangadhi is the repetition of a single line or similar short portion of the song using various melodic tunes.
Initially, the tune is simple and slowly, the structure of the raga is revealed using more complicated structures.
This portion is generally composed but many performers include their own variations also.
A Swarajathi is sometimes included along with the Krithis and Kirtanais in the main portion of the concert.
A Swarajathi is like a Krithi but A Swarajathi Charanam section is rendered first using the swaras and then the lyrics.
Some of the songs are preceded by an Aalaapanai, and may include Niraval and/or Kalpanaaswaram.
An Aalapanai is an improvisation in the same raga as the song.
An Aalapanai has no lyrics and only abstract syllables are used.
The Aalaapanai has a formal structure, similar to the The Pallavi scheme.
It includes movements in all the The three sthaayis as the raga allows.
Sthaayi is the octave or register of the swaras.
The normal or middle sthaayi is termed Madhya sthaayi, the upper octave is Thaara sthaayi, the lower octave is Mandhara sthaayi.
Similar names exist for further octaves.
This structure is modified for ragas which are better exposed otherwise.
For example, Aalaapanais in the raga Ataana are often started in Thaara sthaayi.
Niraval is similar to sangathi but performed in an extempore manner.
Kalpanaaswaram is to Chittaswaram what Niraval is to Sangathi.
Successful Kalpanaaswaram rendition requires thorough study of the elements of the ragam.
Madurai Mani Iyer was well known for Madurai Mani Iyer eagerness to sing Kalpanaaswarams with every song.
Many recitals have a major item called Ragam-Thaanam-Pallavi.
The Ragam portion is an elaborate Aalaapanai, a study in the structure of the chosen ragam.
The Thaanam portion is like an Aalaapanai but The Thaanam portion has rhythm.
Typical syllables used in a Thaanam include Ta, Na and Nom.
Thaanam is an essential part of playing the veena, due to the nature of the instrument.
Pallavi rendition is intimately connected with the performers sense of rhythm.
The Pallavi portion also generally includes Kalpanaswarams.
Devotional items are quite common towards the end of the recital.
These include Slokas, Bhajans and compositions by or in honor of the performers Guru.
A Thillaana is performed at or very near the end of the concert.
The Thillaana is a composed piece intended mainly for dance.
Usually, there are no lyrics and only certain syllables denoting division of the taalam are used.
The concluding piece of the recital is called Mangalam and is generally in the ragas Saurashtram, Madhyamavati or Surati.
Arohana : sr2g3pd2s Avarohana : sn3d2pm1g3r2s.
Manda Sudharani is an Indian carnatic vocalist.
Manda Sudharani is well-versed in the syntax and grammar of Carnatic classical idiom, rooted in classicism.
Manda Sudharani has performed at major carnatic events.
She had also performed on All India Radio.
Prof Dr. Prapancham Sita Ram is a Carnatic flautist from the state of Andhra Pradesh, India.
Sitaram is a disciple of flautist T.R. Mahalingam and is a top artist in the All India Radio.
Sitaram has trained students in Carnatic flute, including Balasai and Shreyas Sridhar.
Sitaram is presently based in Triplicane, Chennai.
Sitaram is married and has two children.
Vagadheeswari is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Carnatic is the 34th melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
Carnatic is called Bhogachhayanata in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 4th ragam in the 6th chakra Rutu.
The mnemonic name is Rutu-Bhu.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ru gu ma pa dhi ni.
The mnemonic phrase structure is as follows :.
The swaras shatsruthi rishabham, antara gandharam, shuddha madhyamam, chathusruthi dhaivatham and kaisiki nishadham are used in this scale.
As Vagadheeshwari is a melakarta ragam, by definition Vagadheeshwari is a sampoorna ragam.
Vagadheeshwari is the shuddha madhyamam equivalent of Nasikabhooshani, which is the 70th melakarta scale.
Vagadheeshwari has a few minor janya ragams associated with Vagadheeshwari, of which Magadhi and Mohanangi are occasionally heard.
See List of janya ragams for full list of ragams associated with Vagadheeswari.
Here are a few common compositions sung in concerts, set to Vagadheeshwari.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Vagadheeshwaris notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields 2 other minor melakarta ragams, namely, Naganandini and Bhavapriya.
For further details and an illustration refer Graha bhedam on Naganandini.
Kurai Onrum Illai.
Kurai Onrum Illai is a Tamil devotional song written by C. Rajagopalachari.
The song was written in praise of the Hindu god Lord Krishna and set in Carnatic music.
The song was sung by M. S. Subbulakshmi at the United Nations in 1969.
Kurai Onrum Illai is one of the few songs written by Indian politician, freedom-fighter and Governor-General of India, Chakravarti Rajagopalachari.
The song comprises 3 stanzas each set in three different ragas.
Kurai Onrum Illai is a very popular song in South India and is a regular in most Carnatic concerts.
It became very famous after it was sung by M. S. Subbulakshmi.
a religious Hindu, or Rajaji was Rajaji was popularly known, was a religious Hindu and a devout Vaishnavite.
The song depicts Rajaji intense devotion to God.
The date of the composition is not clearly known.
Rajaji also composed a benediction verse in English which was sung at the same concert.
Since then, the song has been widely appreciated and sung in most Carnatic concerts.
Text of the composition.
kurrai onnnrrum illai knnnnaa.
kurrai onnnrrum illai knnnnaa.
knnnnukkut teriyaaml ninnnrraalum ennnkkuk.
veennttiytu veerrillai mrraimuurtti knnnnaa.
knnnnaa tiraiyinnnpinnn nirrkinnnrraay knnnnaa - unnnnnnai.
tiraiyinnnpinnn nirrkinnnrraay knnnnaa - unnnnnnai.
ennnrraalum kurrai onnnrrum ennnkkillai knnnnaa.
kunnnrrinnnmeel kllaaki nirrkinnnrr vrtaa.
kurrai onnnrrum illai mrraimuurtti knnnnaa.
mnnivnnnnaa mlaiyppaa koovintaa koovintaa koovintaa koovintaa.
nilaiyaakk koovilil nirrkinnnrraay keecvaa.
nilaiyaakk koovilil nirrkinnnrraay keecvaa.
yaatum mrrukkaat mlaiyppaa.
eetum tr nirrkum krunnaik kttl annnnnnai.
ennnrrum iruntitt eetu kurrai ennnkku.
onnnrrum kurraiyillai mrrai muurtti knnnnaa.
koovintaa koovintaa koovintaa koovintaa.
Kurai Onrum Illai . ondrum illai, Maraimurthi kanna kanna !.
kurai ondrum illai, Maraimurthi kanna !.
kurai ondrum illai, Maraimurthi kanna !.
Kannukku theriyamal nirkinray kanna ;.
kannukku theriyamal ninralum enakku.
kurai onrum illai maraimurttik kanna.
Vendiyadhai thandhida Venkatesan enrirukka,.
Vendiyadhu ver illai maraimurthi kanna -.
Maraimurthi kanna !.
Maraimurthi kanna !.
Tiraiyinpin nirkinray kanna - unnai.
marai odum gnaniyar mattume kanpar,.
enralum kurai onrum enakku illai kanna.
Kunrin mel kallakki nirkinra varada.
kurai onrum illai, Maraimurthi kanna !.
Maraimurthi kanna !.
Maraimurthi kanna !.
Kalinanukkirangi, kallile irangi,.
silaiyaka kovilil nirkinray kesava.
Yadum marukkada malaiyappa - un marbil.
Edum tara nirkum karunai kadal annai.
enrum irundhida aedu kurai enakku.
onrum kurai illai maraimurthi kanna.
Maraimurthi kanna !.
No regrets have I. Lord of the Written Word,.
I light, I sight,.
My very eyes.
Though you stand.
Where I behold you not.
I light, my very eyes,.
Protector of all earthlings.
I know you sustain I.
Lord of the Venkata Hill so pure.
You meet I hunger, I thirst.
I hope, I prayer.
You keep I from harm,.
Lord of the Sparkling Gems,.
I need naught else.
Father of the Seven Hills,.
You stand -- do you not ?.
Veiled by a screen.
Only the learned can part.
For Only the learned are the learned.
Which I am not.
But no, no regrets have I. Crowning this hill.
You stand as rock.
Giver of Boons.
Father to these hills.
No regrets have I.
In this benighted Age of ours.
The worst of all the Four --.
You have entered.
A shaft of granite.
Where though I see you not.
No regrets have I. Boulder of strength.
With the Ocean,.
Heaving on My very own, who grants . breast,.
Of the purest compassion --.
My very own, who grants.
Anything I ask of her.
Can I possibly have No regrets ?.
The two of you, I know,.
Stand there for I.
No regrets have I I Govinda.
None, none whatsoever.
Explanation and interpretation.
Rajajis grandson Gopal Gandhi believes that there were multiple factors that led to the composition.
Rajajis grandson Gopal Gandhi also suspects the presence of hidden meanings in the song.
Like the nadaswaram, the ottu is a large conical instrument, some two and a half feet long.
Unlike the nadaswaram, the ottu has no fingerholes, being intended to produce one constant note while playing.
It is provided with several small tuning holes which can be stopped with wax to modify its note.
In some cases, a shruti box may be used in place of the ottu due to its steadier sound.
Punya Srinivas is a professional vainika and vocalist.
Kamala Aswathama, the mother of renowned vainika E. Gayathri.
Kamala Aswathama is currently pursuing the advanced aspects of Carnatic music from Sangeetha Kala Acharya Suguna Varadachari.
Kamala Aswathama was also exposed to Western classical music by Dr Augustine Paul.
Kamala Aswathama husband, D. A. Srinivas is a talented mridangam player who usually accompanies Kamala Aswathama in Kamala Aswathama concerts.
Kamala Aswathama was proclaimed an A Grade Artiste of All India Radio when Kamala Aswathama was 20 years old.
Kamala Aswathama has also collaborated with percussionists, Zakir Hussain, John McLaughlin, Matthew Garrison and U. Srinivas.
To date, Kamala Aswathama has released 5000 recordings as a Veena player.
With Kamala Aswathama band, Paanchajanyam, Kamala Aswathama has brought many different popular musical genres on the Veena.
Mannargudi Sambasiva Bhagavatar.
Mannargudi Sambasiva Bhagavathar was a Carnatic musician, musicologist, Harikatha exponent and composer.
He served Carnatic music for over seven decades.
He was a disciple of Sangeetha Bhupathi Sri Maharajapuram Viswanatha Iyer in music and Sri Madurai Narayana Bhagavatar and Smt.
Saraswathy Bai in Harikatha.
Saraswathy Bai in Harikatha . performed more than 1000 music concerts and 7000 Harikatha performances all over India.
Saraswathy Bai in Harikatha . composed different musical forms such as Geetham, Varnam, Krithi, Javali, Padam, Thillana, Ragamalika and Harikatha compositions.
The first edition of Saraswathy Bai in Harikatha . compositions are published in Tamil in the book Sangeetha Ratna Mala.
His compositions are released in cassettes and CDs.
His composition Neerajadalanayana in raga Maand was popularised by his guru Sri Maharajapuram Viswanatha Iyer.
He spent his early years in Mannargudi and later moved to Madras.
He studied in Sri Ramakrishna Mission in Mylapore.
He then had his carnatic music training through the traditional Gurukulam from Sri Maharajapuram Viswanatha Iyer.
He imbibed the spirit of musical style of his Guru Viswanatha Iyer.
He was then known as Sambasiva Iyer.
He switched over from Carnatic Vocal music to Harikatha Kalakshepam and became known as Sambasiva Bhagavatar.
Sambasiva Bhagavatar has three sons Rajaraman, Balasubramanian and Madhavan and two daughters Balasaraswathi and Chandra.
Awards and Titles.
Bhagavatar was a recipient of the Government of Tamil Nadu s Kalaimamani award.
He trained many students in the art of Music and Harikatha Kalakshepam.
His prominent disciples included the violinist M. Chandrasekaran, K.V. Krishnan, Lalitha Alladi Ramakrishnan, Jaya Krishnan and others.
In Harikatha Harikatha disciples include Susheela Achudaraman, Gowri Rajagopal, Shyamala Ramachandran and others.
A few of Harikatha Sahityams or compositions are listed below.
Service to Thiagaraja sangeetha Vidwath Samajam.
He was the Treasurer, Secretary, President and finally Chairman and executive trustee of the Samajam.
He served the institution for over six decades.
Thiruvisaipa denotes the ninth volumes of the Tirumurai, the twelve-volume collection of Tamil Saivite devotional poetry.
List of Temple associated with Tiruvisaippa.
The following are the temples revered by the hymns of Thiruvisaippa and are in turn referred as Tiruvisaipa Thalangal.
The shrine of Gangaikonda Cholapuram are revered as under.
He of the Shrine of Gangaikonda Choleswaram takes whatever forms that Gangaikonda Cholapuram worship visualize - 131,5.
Rugmini Gopalakrishnan is a Saraswati veena artist in Carnatic music from India, Rajendra Prasad.
Rukmini Gopalakrishnan was born in Tamil Nadu, before moving to Kerala with Rukmini Gopalakrishnan family as a young girl.
Rukmini Gopalakrishnan is the granddaughter of Gayakashikhamani Harikesanallur Muthiah Bhagavatar.
Rukmini Gopalakrishnan has had a 60 year career constituting the teaching, recording and performing of Carnatic music in India, Rajendra Prasad.
Rukmini Gopalakrishnan went on to serve as Principal at Chembai Memorial Government Music College in Palakkad from 1987 to 1990.
Tharangams of the Krishna Leela Tharangini to which, Raga Tarangini is believed, Lord Krishna danced.
Raga Tarangini consists of 12 Tarangams and encapsulates 153 songs, 302 slokams and 31 choornikaas.
Teertha followed Veda Vyasa 's Bhagavatam and concentrated on the 10th Skandam.
Periyasaami Thooran was a patriot, the Tamil Encyclopedia poet, teacher, and a composer of Carnatic music.
Periyasami was greatly influenced and inspired by Mahakavi Subramania Bharathiyar and Mahatma Gandhi.
It was at this time that he began writing under the pen name Thooran as Pithan featured anti British occupation literature.
He declined to sit for the final Bachelor of Arts examination shocked by the execution by the British of Bhagat Singh.
the pen name Thooran gained the pen name Thooran B.A. and L.T. later.
A prolific writer, he composed over six hundred songs on national, spiritual and moral issues.
A prolific writer wrote a poem a day for several years after A prolific writer daily poojas.
A man with noble ideals, the pen name Thooran is an acknowledged poet and composer.
Analogous to Tyagaraja s Santhamulekha, Soukyamuledhu, Thoorans Santhamillamal sukham undo ?.
stresses that there is no joy without patience and no contentment amidst worries.
Deep philosophical truths lay hidden in his simple devotional songs.
Musical aesthetics and bhava find abundant evidence in his compositions.
While he was not a musician, he had profound poetic talents.
Like Arunachala Kavirayar, Arunachala Kavirayar had to seek outside help to set Arunachala Kavirayar lyrics to music.
Sivaramakrishna Iyer was Sivaramakrishna Iyer guru and choreographer.
Contributions to the Tamil Encyclopedia literature.
Musiri Subramania Iyer songs were published in five volumes entitled Isai Mani Manjari.
Nalla Nalla Paattu was Chief Editor from 1948 to 1978 of the Tamil Encyclopedia which ran to ten volumes.
The credit for bringing out the first-ever Childrens Encyclopaedia in Tamil in ten volumes goes to Tamil in ten volumes.
Kavi Yogi Maharishi Dr. Shuddhananda Bharati was an Indian philosopher and poet.
Shuddhananda Bharati was born in Sivaganga in Southern India and died in Sholapuram near Sivaganga.
Kavi Yogi Maharishi founded a school, Shuddhananda Bharati Desiya Vidyalayam High School in 1979.
In Carnatic music pallavi is the thematic line of a song.
It is usually one cycle long and repeated twice in order to give the percussionist the idea of the chosen taalam.
Sometimes it is repeated a few more times using different phrases of the Ragam to which the song is set.
In Carnatic music, pallavi also forms a part of a special type of rendition called Ragam Thanam Pallavi.
Ragam in this context is the initial alapana of chosen ragam.
Thanam is elaboration of the ragam using percussion syllables.
The Pallavi is mainly presented as the piece-de-resistance of the concert.
Saketharaman is a performing musician of Carnatic music in India.
He is a disciple of Lalgudi Jayaraman.
He is an A grade All India Radio artist.
To understand rhythm and perform better, he went a step further and learnt the Carnatic Mridangam, a percussion instrument.
He pursued his Masters degree in Software Engineering and is holding a high position in a successful international investment banking company.
Saketharaman has imbibed the famous Lalgudi Bani rich in Bhavam.
His voice that flows effortlessly in all three sthayis never fails to enchant the audience.
His Kalpana Swaras mirror His Kalpana Swaras rhythmic excellence.
His Kalpana Swaras methodical expansion of ragas, clear brigas and rich manodharma is a treat for music aficionados.
Here is a comprehensive list of His Kalpana Swaras albums.
Vandhaan Raghuraman Saketharaman Live at Paris-Swathi Soft Solutions 2012.
Saketharaman, Live concert 2010 in Narada Gana Sabha - Charsur.
Aatma Nivedhanam 2009 - Swathi Soft Solutions along with Vidwan Shri Umayalpuram Sivaraman and Vidwan Shri Mysore Nagaraj.
Nadha Geetham 2009-Amudham.
Saketharaman, Live concert 2008 in Bharath Sangeeth Utsav-Carnatica.
Live concert 2001 in Naradha Gana Sabha-HMV.
Saketharamans mother, Vijaya Santhanam, is a postgraduate in Chemistry and an ardent follower of Shri Shri Krishna Premi Swamigal.
Saketharamans father, a Chartered Accountant, is a Chartered Accountant.
a Chartered Accountant elder sister, Vishaka Hari is a well known Harikatha exponent.
a Chartered Accountant wife, Vidhya, is a doctor.
The couple reside in Bangalore.
Ravi Varman Thampi, better known as Irayimman Thampi, was a Carnatic musician as well as a music composer from Kerala, India.
He was a vocalist in the court of Swathi Thirunal.
His compositions include the lullaby Omanathinkal Kidavo.
He was named after his grandfather and was known as Ravi Varman Thampi which was popularised as Irayimman Thampi.
Thampi was brought up at a house called Kizhake Madhom by his parents.
He wrote his first poem when he was fourteen and dedicated it to Karthika Thirunal Dharmaraja of Travancore.
Since then he occupied an enviable position in the Travancore court.
She grew into a prominent poetess and got many rewards from her cousin and king Swathi Thirunal.
Another daughter of Thampi was married by Sri Narayanan Thampi of Arumana, son of Maharajah Visakham Thirunal.
Irayimman Thampi was already thirty one years of age when Swathi Thirunal Maharajah was born.
Irayimman Thampi wrote the famous lullaby Omanathinkal Kidavo for Swathi Thirunal.
Irayimman Thampi died in 1856.
Maharajah Swathi Thirunal Rama Varma is known to have referred to Ravi Varman Thampi as Thampi maman.
Some of his Kritis are.
R. K. Srikantan.
Rudrapatna Krishnashastri Srikantan is a vocalist of the Karnataka Sangeeta tradition of South Indian music.
Dr. R. K Srikantan was born to a Sanketi family in Rudrapatna, Hassan district of Karnataka, on 14 January 1920.
Dr. R. K Srikantan father R Krishnashastri was an orator, singer of Gamaka, playwright, poet, and a harikatha vidwan.
Later, Srikantans mother Sannamma was mentored by His father R Krishnashastri brother R. K. Venkatarama Shastri.
Later, he obtained his BA degree from the Maharaja College, Mysore.
Guru-shishya tradition of R. K. Srikantan.
Srikantans singing is characterized by Sahitya Shuddhi, Shruti Shuddhi and Swara Shuddhi.
Dr. R. K Srikantan has many laurels to Dr. R. K Srikantan credit.
Here is a list of some of the Awards and Titles in Dr. R. K Srikantan name.
Teaching and Lineage.
Jyoti swarupini is a ragam in Carnatic music.
It is the 68th Melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
It is the prati madhyamam equivalent of Ragavardhini, which is the 32nd melakarta.
It is called Jyoti or Joti or Jyoti in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
It is the 2nd ragam in the 12th chakra Aditya.
The mnemonic name for this ragam is Aditya-Sri.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ru gu mi pa dha ni.
Its ascending and descending scale is as follows :.
See swaras in Carnatic music for details on above notation.
The notes used are shatsruthi rishabham, antara gandharam, prati madhyamam, shuddha dhaivatham, kaisiki nishadham.
Jyotiswarupini, being a melakarta ragam, by definition is a sampoorna ragam.
A few minor janya ragams are associated with Jyotiswarupini.
See List of janya ragams for full list of janya ragams associated with this and other melakarta ragams.
Here are a few compositions set to this parent musical scale.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Jyotiswarupinis notes when shifted using Graha bhedam does not yield any other melakarta ragam.
G. N. Balasubramaniam.
G. N. Balasubramaniam, popularly known as GNB, was a vocalist in the Carnatic tradition.
Early life and background.
Balasubramanian was born in Gudalur, a small village near Mayavaram in Tanjore, India.
Balasubramanian was the son of G. V. Narayanaswamy Iyer, who was a keen student of music.
Throughout Balasubramanian younger years, Balasubramanian observed with utmost attention the techniques of the musicians of Balasubramanian day.
Ariyakudi Ramanuja Iyengar became Ariyakudi Ramanuja Iyengar manasika guru and inspiration.
While Ariyakudi Ramanuja Iyengar father dreamed of living in a villa at Luz Church road through GNB becoming a successful lawyer.
The young musician in G.N.B made way for greater goals in life.
under the guidance of Sri T.S. Sabesa Iyer, but discontinued due to ill health.
Within 2 years, Sabesa Iyer was ready for concert performances.
Sabesa Iyer acted in films, including Bhama Vijayam, Sakunthala, and Rukmangada.
In Sakunthala, Sabesa Iyer appeared as Dushyantha, alongside the vocalist M.S. Subbulakshmi.
After a short stint in the film industry, GNB returned to the Carnatic music fraternity, until his passing in 1965.
He emphasized the richness of the composition with expansive improvisation passages.
Today this method is almost used in the renditions of most popular Carnatic musicians.
He composed over 250 compositions krithis in Sanskrit, Tami and Telugu.
GNB also composed kritis and invented new ragas.
He taught a number of students during his active years.
His health deteriorated and worsened by an episode of a major stroke in the late 1950s.
He died on 1 May 1965.
Shivaranjani or Sivaranjani is a musical scale used in Indian classical music.
There are two scales, one each in Hindustani music and Carnatic music.
The Hindustani raga is a pentatonic scale, while the Carnatic scale is a sampoorna scale.
The Hindustani raga Shivaranjani belongs to the Kaafi thaat in terms of classification of the scale.
the Kaafi thaat structure is as follows.
The komal gandhar in place of shuddh gandhar is the difference between this raga and the global musical scale of Bhoop.
Borrowed into Carnatic music.
This Hindustani scale is also the currently popular scale in Carnatic music.
This scale is a janya ragam, as it does not have all the seven swaras.
It is a symmetric ragam that does not contain madhyamam or nishadam.
It is an audava-audava ragam in Carnatic music classification.
Its structure using swaras in Carnatic music notation is as follows.
Shivaranjani ragam brings out karuna rasa and lends itself for elaboration and exploration.
It has many compositions in classical music and in film songs.
The popular Hindi film song Jaane kahan gaye woh din is based on this scale.
Kannum Kannum from the movie Thiruda Thiruda is regarded as the most different song done in this raga.
In Carnatic music, two ragamalikas start with a refrain in Shivaranjani.
M S Subbulakshmi made Kurai onrum illai very popular which begins with this scale.
Another composition Muiyakka muiyakka, by Purandaradasa, also begins with this scale.
Another famous composition in this raaga is Jagat janani rendered in Tamil language.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Shivaranjanis notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields 2 other pentatonic ragams, namely, Sunadavinodini and Revati.
See Graha bhedam on Shivaranjani for more details and an illustration.
The Carnatic scale Shivaranjani is a janya ragam associated with the 64th parent scale Vachaspati.
It has vakra prayoga and its scale is as follows.
The compositions in this scale are :.
Varnam is a form of song in the Carnatic music repertoire.
A Varnam is a relatively long piece and can range from 30 minutes to up to an hour.
A Varnam is usually set to Aadi or Ata tala.
A Varnam is the center piece in a recital of Bharatanatyam dance.
It is a tradition to start a recital in Carnatic music with a varnam.
It has two types : Taana varnam and Pada varnam.
Considered as probably the most complex form in Carnatic music, varnams play a significant role in Carnatic music.
Type of varnams.
With rhythmic elements like a padam, pada varnams are generally sung to accompany South Indian classical dance, including bharatanatyam.
The swaras in this type of varnam are suitable for intricate footwork.
Contents of a varnam.
The varnam is subdivided into several sections :.
Generally, a varnam is sung as follows :.
Repeat, then the Pallavi sung in triple speed, or in original speed.
There are generally 3-5 swara groups in every varnam.
In a concert, the entire charanam section is sung at approximately 1.5 speed.
Sometimes when repeating the Pallavi the Annupallavi and Muktayi Swarams are repeated in double or triple speed.
In most of the Adi Tala Varnams the tala is placed in the 2 kalai version.
So therefore each beat and finger count is placed twice.
Adi Tala Varnams include :.
Ata Tala Varnams include :.
The Arabhi ragam varnam is supposed to be the only longest piece with jantai and tattu prayogas.
Dwaram Venkataswamy Naidu.
Dwaram Venkataswamy Naidu was one of the most important carnatic music violinists of the 20th century.
Naidu was partially blind.
He played at the National Physical Laboratory auditorium, New Delhi in 1952, to raise funds for the Blind Relief Association.
Early life and background.
Dwaram Venkataswamy Naidu was born in November, in Bangalore, India and was raised in Visakhapatnam.
His first solo concert was given in Vellore in 1938.
He was known for his extremely well developed soft bowing technique combined with a firm fingering technique.
He wrote several articles on music, like an essay on the Peculiar characteristics of the tambura.
He cautioned his disciples against missing practice even for a day.
He often used to say, Music is an audible tapas.
The famous playback singer Ghantasala Venkateswara Rao learned Carnatic music under Naidu.
Kalaimamani SMT.RadhaNarayanan was also a disciple of V.naidu.
Awards and honors.
The Sri Dwaram Venkataswamy Naidu Memorial Trust was established in Chennai.
Dwaram Venkataswamy Naidu Kalakshetram was established in Visakhapatnam.
Statues of this notable musician have been erected in Visakhapatnam and Chennai, India.
Several Students learned music under him.The notable students are.
Garimella Naga Raja Rao.
Muthu Thandavar was composer of Carnatic music.
Muthu Thandavar was an early architect of the present day Carnatic kriti format, which consists of the pallavi, anupallavi and charanam.
Muthu Thandavar lived in the town of Sirkazhi in Tamil Nadu.
Muthu Thandavar contributions to Carnatic music have been largely forgotten and not many of Muthu Thandavar kritis are in vogue today.
Muthu Thandavar, along with Arunachala Kavi and Marimutthu Pillai are known as the Tamil Trinity of Carnatic music.
Muthu Thandavar also composed several padams, short songs mainly sung accompanying Bharatanatyam performances.
Some of these padams are still popular such as Teruvil Varano in raga Khamas and Ittanai tulambaramo in raga Dhanyasi.
Muththu Thandavar was born in Sirkazhi, in a family of instrumental musicians who served the temples.
They were known as Isai Vellalar.
Isai Vellalar was named Thandavan after the deity at Chidambaram.
As a youngster, Thandavan suffered an incurable wasting disease which caused havoc on his health and appearance.
He was not able to follow the family profession on account of this debilitating condition.
He was also shunned by everybody.
But 80-year-old Mutthu Taandavar proved a sickly child with severe skin infection.
80-year-old Mutthu Taandavar only friend was a musical neighbour called Shivabhagyam, who sang to him daily of Shiva, though everyone protested.
His own family turned His own family out because His own family disease had made His own family so loathsome.
His own family used to visit a to hear her sing and dance.
Sivabhagyam continued the daily ritual of singing in the temple.
Thandavan was a pioneer in composing padams sung during dance performances.
Teruvil Vaarano is a classic padam and a delight even today for dancers and audience alike.
80-year-old Mutthu Taandavar subsisted on the local temple 's prasad, growing sicker by the day.
Crawling one day into the temple 's palanquin store, 80-year-old Mutthu Taandavar fell asleep.
The priests put out the lamps and locked up for the night.
Awaking in the dark, 80-year-old Mutthu Taandavar called out weakly to God.
The priest 's little daughter soon appeared, carrying food.
The boy realised then that it was Parvati, worshipped as ` Lokanayaki ' in Seergazhi, who had come disguised to Lokanayaki.
Off went Mutthu Taandavar to the Kanaka Sabha.
His first song began with the words,  Bhuloka Kailayagiri Chidambaram  and five gold pieces apparently appeared at Nataraja 's feet.
Many songs followed.
One day, to his confusion, not a word was spoken in the temple.
80-year-old Mutthu Taandavar could hear only 80-year-old Mutthu Taandavar own desperate heart beat.
80-year-old Mutthu Taandavar cried aloud,  Pesaade nenjamey !.
and so composed the day 's song : 80-year-old Mutthu Taandavar dependence on others was over.
Very few of Muththu Thandavars compositions have survived the test of time.
Sixty of Muththu Thandavars have been collected.
Twenty five padams are also available.
Dharma Raja Karthika Thirunal Rama Varma was the Maharajah of the Travancoreans from 1758 until his death in 1798.
He succeeded his uncle Marthanda Varma, who is credited with the title of maker of modern Travancore.
During his reign Dharma Raja not only retained all the territories his predecessor had gained but administered the kingdom with success.
He had a brother Prince Makayiram Thirunal, grandfather of Irayimman Thampi, who pre-deceased him.
Succession and initial career.
With the death of his uncle Marthanda Varma in 1758, Karthika Thirunal Rama Varma succeeded to the Travancore musnud.
With the able services of the Dalawa Ayyapan Marthanda Pillai, Karthika Thirunal began his reign.
The fortunes of the the Cochin royal family were at the lowest ebb.
A very small portion of their original territory alone remained in the the Cochin Rajas possession.
From 1755 AD, the Zamorin of Calicut Kingdom, was in possession of the major portions of the Cochin.
Most of the barons of Kochi had sided with the enemy.
The Raja of the Cochin deputed The Raja of Cochin nephew to ask for prompt assistance from Rama Varma.
The same feeling might have prevented Marthanda Varma, his uncle, from rendering assistance immediately.
At last the Raja of the Cochin met with Rama Varma to press The Raja of Cochin request.
The Raja of Cochin strengthened The Raja of Cochin promises with the sanction of religion.
The Zamorin sent an express messenger to Trivandrum to beg the Maharaja to stay the hands of the Travancore Maharaja General.
In 1759 A.D, the Rajah of the Cochin sent his nephew to sign a treaty with Travancore.
The little kingdoms of Parur and Alangad were also annexed to Travancore after pensioning off the ruling families.
The scheme was then taken up.
The Raja of the Cochin was in entire agreement with the proposal.
Dharma Raja and Hyder Ali.
In 1766, Hyder invaded Malabar a second time.
What Hyder wanted was a free passage to Travancore through the Dutch territories.
The Dutch Governor replied that The Dutch Governor had informed Batavia of Hyders request and was waiting for a reply.
Hyder asked the kings of the Cochin and the Travancoreans to pay the expenses of the Travancoreans Malabar campaign.
Hyder added that if Travancore refused, the Travancoreans will pay a visit.
Dharma Raja and Tipu Sultan.
Tipu and his forces reached the Nedumkotta line which protected Travancores northern frontier and launched an attack in late December 1789.
Tippu sent a letter on 19 January 1790 to Budruz Zuman Khan.
Tippu said :.
For nearly a month, the the Travancoreans army under the protection of the Nedumkotta lines, managed to defend the state.
However, finally a breach of about 1 km in length was effected and the Mysorean army entered Travancore.
Soon, the entire Nedumkotta fell into the hands of Tipu Sultan, who captured large quantities of ammunition and 200 cannons.
Hindu temples were destroyed and the subjects fled to the forests.
The entire country was laid waste with fire and sword.
Even Christians were not spared.
At day-break, the Travancoreans broke down the retaining wall, letting the water flood onto the Mysorean forces.
The Sultans Palki with bed, some personal ornaments, and a dagger fell into the hands of Travancore soldiers.
The new Governor mobilized the British forces stationed in Travancore to support the Maharajah.
But war did occur, in which the Travancoreans provided Hearing of this, Tipu Sultan forces to the British.
Tipu Sultan surrendered and the Treaty of Seringapatam was signed.
Treaty with the British.
The Maharaja paid Treaty of Seringapatanam as the Travancore Maharaja was not in a military position to oppose the English.
Besides, the Maharajah was also to help the British during times of need.
teaching Kathakali Playwright and Composer.
As the composer of teaching Kathakali Plays.
He set a systematic curriculum for teaching Kathakali.
Being a good vocalist and scholar in music and dance, he composed excellent Kritis which have enriched Carnatic music.
He was perhaps the first violinist from the royal family.
He has to his credit nearly 150 compositions.
It was with the advent of the teaching Kathakali plays of Karthika Thirunal that many reforms were brought in teaching Kathakali.
Changes were implemented in the structure of plays and in their technique to be adopted during presentation.
Priority was given for sringara padas.
The rule that each character should enter the stage with sringara padas was introduced by him.
teaching Kathakali characters must enter by presenting pada in Padi raga.
He has to his credit seven plays :.
He had maintained the sovereignty of Travancore and protected the sovereignty of Travancore from destruction by the superior Mysore forces.
He maintained the friendship cultivated with the British by his uncle Marthanda Varma.
So pleased were these subjects of Malabar that many families of kings and nobles stayed back in Travancore.
Karthika Thirunal Maharajah had four wives or Ammachis.
His first wife was Panapillai Kali Amma Nagamani Amma from Vadasseri.
His other three wives hailed from Thiruvattar, Arumana and Nagercoil.
The Maharajahs brother married from the Puthumana Ammaveedu and his grandson was the poet Irayimman Thampi.
Bombay Lakshmi Rajagopalan.
Early life and background.
Lakshmi was born in Mumbai called Matunga to Radha and T. V. Panchapakesan.
Lakshmi has four sisters who have also been honed in music.
Lakshmi started learning music at the tender age of 3 from Lakshmi mother and was equally well supported by Lakshmi father.
Lakshmi did Lakshmi graduation in Commerce and C.A.I.I.B from Mumbai University.
Lakshmi completed a 5-year music course at Bharatiya Music & Fine Arts, in Mumbai.
Later underwent 2 years of advanced training in Raagam, Thanam and Pallavi under the tutelage of Smt T.R. Balamani.
Lakshmi Rajagopalan has sung in various popular stages and in many TV channels including Jaya TV, Amrita TV and Asianet.
Amrita has performed in All India Radio & Doordarshan Kendra as an ` A ' Grade Artist.
Being residing in Mumbai residing in Mumbai constantly gives performance in almost all popular sabhas in Mumbai and Navi Mumbai.
residing in Mumbai has also conducted lecture cum demonstrations in Mumbai at Shivali Cultural Society, Kalamanjari and at Navarasa Music Academy.
residing in Mumbai voice lends Her voice well to the Indian Carnatic classical songs.
City wise list of performances in India.
Awards and recognition.
Lakshmi has won several 1st prizes from,.
Music Navarasa Music Academy, Chennai ;.
Indian Fine Arts Society, Chennai ;.
Krishna Gana Sabha ;.
Gold Medal  & prestigious Tambura prizes in the competitions conducted by Sri Shanmukhananda Fine Arts Mumbai and.
Sri Swathi Thirunal Kalakshetra, Mumbai.
She also has been honoured as  Sangeeta Sevamani  by His Holiness Sri Sri Jayendra Saraswathi of Kanchi Peetam.
To her credit, she has released the following audio CD.
Kanchi Sankara by RLV Productions.
Devi Saranam by RLV Productions.
Carnatic Classical by CBS Gramaphone Recording Co.
Her concerts are highly rated and many positive reviews have been published.
Some of them are listed here.
DNA-navi mumbai : 20 November 2007.
Keertananjalis Carnatic treat enthralls audience.
NEW BOMBAY -23.
NEW BOMBAY -23 . Lakshmi Rajagopalans Diwali Musical Fireworks.
THE HINDU 12 January 2007.
Casting a magic spell.
DNA - navimumbai 20 May 2006.
IN NEW BOMBAY 20 November 2007 to 26 May 2006.
Stalwart Smt.LakshmiRajagopalans Magnificent Concert.
THE THE HINDU, New Delhi ., New Delhi.
The Indian Express, New Delhi.
Singing from the heart.
THE INDIAN POST, KOLKATA.
Good song selection.
THE INDIAN POST, KOLKATA.
FREE PRESS JOURNAL.
Melody & mime.
THE INDIAN EXPRESS, Mumbai.
12 January 2007.
THE HINDU - 30 May 2008.
Music that marks a puritan.
Gaula or Gowla is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Gowla is a janya ragam from the 15th melakarta scale Mayamalavagowla.
Gowla is a janya scale, as Gowla does not have all the seven swaras in the ascending and descending scale.
Gaula is an ancient ragam mentioned in Sangita Ratnakara, Sangita Makarandha and Sangita Ratnakara samayasara.
It is an auspicious ragam, which is mostly sung in the early part of the concert.
It is a popular ragam and also a ghana ragam.
Structure and Lakshana.
Gowla is an audava-vakra-shadava ragam.
Vakra-shadava means that the descending scale has 6 notes with inclusion of zig-zag movements.
Its arohana-avarohana structure is as follows :.
For the details of the notations and terms, see swaras in Carnatic music.
There are many compositions set to Gaula ragam.
Here are some popular kritis composed in this ragam.
N. C. Vasanthakokilam.
Nagapattinam Chandrashekhara Vasanthakokilam was a carnatic singer and actress.
She died of tuberculosis in 1951.
NCV was born as Kamakshi in Irinjalakkuda, Cochin State of British India, the present Kerala.
Her family then shifted to Nagapattinam.
Her family father, Chadrashekhara Iyer send Her family under the tutelage of Nagapattinam Jalra Gopala Iyer, an accompanist in Harikatha performances.
In 1936, the family moved to Madras, where Her family started giving concerts.
Her family voice was melodious with perfect intonation, sruti, emotion, high-pitched and clear pronunciation of words.
Her family rendering of higher octaves and sruti were remarkably with effortless ease to bring off brigas.
Her family sang plenty of Tamil songs.
Her family also performed for the Tyagaraja Aradhana each year between 1942 and 1951.
The famous Carnatic music vocalist Tiger Varadachariar had bestowed upon Carnatic the title Madhuragita Vani.
Some of Carnatic famous songs are :.
Some of her famous songs also sang the following songs for Kollywood, Kollywood.
the Tamil film industry, which became very popular.
The Tamil film songs are :.
Besides being a singer par excellence, NCV acted in movies.
Tamil started with Chandra Gupta Chanakya playing the role of the princess Chaaya directed by C. K. Saachi in 1940.
Followed by Venuganan, Gangavathar, Haridas, Valmiki, Kundalakesi and Krishna Vijayam.
Venuganan personal life was an unhappy one.
Venuganan marriage had been a failure as Venuganan husband was not inclined to encourage Venuganan music pursuits.
In later years, Venuganan found a life-partner in a lawyer turned film-maker, C. K. Sathasivan till her last days.
Venuganan fell victim to a severe attack of tuberculosis, and died in 1951 at Venuganan residence in Gopalapuram, Madras.
R. K. Shriramkumar.
R. K. Shriramkumar is a virtuoso violinist and accompanist of the Carnatic Music.
R. K. Shriramkumar was born on 4 October 1966, to Kusuma Krishnamurthy and R V Krishnamurthy.
R. K. Shriramkumar . grandfather was the legendary violinist R. K. Venkatarama Shastri, the brother and guru of R. K. Srikantan.
He received his initial training from Savitri Krishnamurthy and advanced tutelage under his grandfather R. K. Venkatarama Shastri.
He also trained in Vocal Music under D. K. Jayaraman and presently receives guidance from V V Subrahmanyam.
R. K. Shriramkumar . has performed for the prestigious Theatre De la Ville at Paris accompanying Sanjay Subrahmanyan.
R. K. Shriramkumar . is considered as one of the most knowledgeable musician amongst the current generation.
R. K. Shriramkumar . has given many lecture-demonstrations in India and USA.
R. K. Shriram Kumar is a graduate in Mathematics from the Madras University.
R. K. Shriram kumar wed Akila in February 2009.
Alathur Venkatesa Iyer.
Alathur Venkatesa Iyer was a teacher of Carnatic music.
Venkatesa Iyer practised Carnatic music in the style of the composer Tyagaraja.
Venkatesa Iyer later developed a unique style that is known as the Alathur style of rendering kritis.
Venkatesa Iyer was also accomplished in playing the harmonium.
This duo consisted of Alathur Venkatesa Iyer . son, Sivasubramania Iyer, and another student, Srinivasa Iyer of Aangarai near Tanjore.
Veteran mridangam exponent Pudukottai Dakshinamurthy Pillai accompanied them on the mridangam on that occasion.
Venkatesa Iyer was a Baktha of Saint the composer Tyagaraja and popularized Alathur Venkatesa Iyer . krithis in large numbers.
Venkatesa Iyer was instrumental in bringing out a large number of krithis of Maharaja Swathi Thirunal of Travancore.
Alathur Venkatesa Iyer . shined and polished rare compositions of great composers like Meesu Krishna Iyer of the preceding century.
Alathur Venkatesa Iyer . brought such compositions out on the concert platform through the Alathur Brothers.
Alathur Venkatesa Iyer . sought out the nuances of their music and taught them to Alathur Venkatesa Iyer . students.
The effect of such a training is evident in the music of the Alathur Brothers.
Sunadavinodini is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Sunadavinodini is an audava ragam.
Sunadavinodini is a janya ragam, as Sunadavinodini does not have all the seven swaras.
Structure and Lakshana.
Sunadavinodini is a symmetric ragam that does not contain rishabham or panchamam.
Sunadavinodini is a pentatonic scale.
Sunadavinodini structure is as follows :.
Sunadavinodini ragam lends Sunadavinodini for elaboration and exploration and has many compositions.
Here are some popular kritis composed in Sunadavinodini.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Sunadavinodinis notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields 2 other pentatonic ragams, namely, Shivaranjani and Revati.
See Graha bhedam on Shivaranjani for more details and an illustration.
It can be likened to speakers resorting to impromptu speech while reading from their prepared texts.
It serves as an important and integral aspect of Carnatic music.
Based out of Manodharma, Individual styles are developed.
Manodharma has many aspects and performers develop distinct styles based on his/her musical values, interpretation and understanding.
There is ample scope for manodharma when rendering raga alapana, tanam, neraval, pallavi, swaram and also kritis.
Manodharma plays such a significant role that a capable artiste may never render a raga the same way twice.
Unless, these prayogas are brought out in the raga alapana, the identity of the ragam can seldom be established.
For a beginner to identify a raga, these exclusive prayogas are of immense assistance.
The caliber and finesse of a musician is often judged by his/her ability to bring out the excellence of a raga.
Kamavardani is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Carnatic is the 51st Melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
It is also referred by the name Pantuvarali, although purists prefer to designate Carnatic as Kamavardani.
This ragam is very popular with musicians who typically sing Carnatic in the beginning of a concert.
Carnatic is called Kashiramakriya in the Muthuswami Dikshitar school.
The Hindustani music equivalent of Kamavardhini is the Poorvi thaat.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 3rd ragam in the 9th chakra Brahma.
The mnemonic name is Brahma-Go.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ra gu mi pa dha nu.
The mnemonic phrase structure is as follows :.
Structure and Lakshana . is a sampoorna ragam - a ragam that has all seven swaras.
Kamavardani is the prati madhyamam equivalent of Mayamalavagowla.
It has a few minor janya ragams associated with it.
See List of janya ragams for full list of ragams associated with it.
Enna ganu rama by Bhadrachala Ramadas is another well-known composition in this ragam.
Sarasaksha Paripalaya maamayi and Saroruhaasana by Swati Tirunal are set to this ragam.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Kamavardanis notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields Kanakangi.
See further details and an illustration of Graha bhedam on Kanakangi.
Manikkavacakar was a Tamil poet who wrote His Tiruvasakam, a book of Shaiva hymns.
A minister to the Pandya king Varagunavarman II, he lived in Madurai.
His work is a poetic expression of the joy of God-experience, the anguish of being separated from God.
Although he is a prominent saint in Southern India, he is not counted among the sixty-three nayanars.
Manikkavasakar is said to have born in Vadhavoor, seven miles from Madurai on the banks of river Vaigai.
He belonged to Brahmin saiva fold.
The group wore a top tilted knot to denote servitorship to Lord Siva like sambandar, etc.
A mural and statuette of manikkavasagar with head knot is seen in Tirupperunturai near Pudukkotai.
The same is not available now in The same original form.
Another called Vadhavoorar puranam and yet another Sanskrit work of the 12th century CE on the same saint is now missing.
Manikkavasakar received enlightenment, realised that material things are transitory and built the temple of Lord Siva in Tirupperunturai with the money.
Varaguana maharaja immediately gave up Varaguana maharaja throne and attained muthi at feet of Lord Sivan.
Manikkavasakars birth name is unclear, but Varaguana maharaja was known as Vadhavoorar after Varaguana maharaja birth place.
Varaguana maharaja was later called as what we know Varaguana maharaja as Manikkavasakar, the man with words as precious as manikam.
Thereafter Manikkavasakar moved from one place to other, singing and composing devotional songs.
Finally, he settled in Chidambaram.
The tiruchazhal hymn after singing which the communal buddists were exposed is also engraved in one of the prakarams.
The work tiruchitrambalakkovaiyar was sung entirely in thillai chidambaram.
Manikkavasakars work has several parts.
Manickavasagar is believed to have won intellectual arguments with Buddhists of Ceylon at Chidambaram.
Manickavasagar festival is celebrated in the Tamil month of Aani.
Manikkavasakars hagiography is found in the Thiruvilaiyadar Puranam.
Manickavasagar visited various temples in Thanjavur, North Arcot, Chengalpattu, Madras, Tirunelveli and Madurai districts and revered the deities.
Tiruvembavai is sung along with Andals Tiruppavai widely across the temples in Tamil Nadu during the Tamil month of Margazhi.
Gayakapriya is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Gayakapriya is the 13th Melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
Gayakapriya is called Geyahejjujji in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 1st ragam in the 3rd chakra Agni.
The mnemonic name is Agni-Pa.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ra gu ma pa dha na.
Its structure is as follows :.
As Gayakapriya is a melakarta ragam, by definition Gayakapriya is a sampoorna ragam.
Gayakapriya is the shuddha madhyamam equivalent of Dhavalambari, which is the 49th melakarta.
Muthuswami Dikshitar is the 13th Melakarta in the original list compiled by Venkatamakhin.
The notes used in the scale are the same, but the ascending scale is different and vakra.
It is an shadava-sampurna raga.
Gayakapriya has a few minor janya ragams associated with Gayakapriya, of which Kalagada is heard occasionally in concerts, set to Gayakapriya.
See List of janya ragams to see all the ragams associated with Gayakapriya.
Here are a few common compositions sung in concerts, set to Gayakapriya, set to Gayakapriya.
Muthuswami Dikshitar s composition Ramachandra bhakthum is set to Geyahejjujji ragam.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Gayakapriyas notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields a minor melakarta ragam Dhatuvardani.
For further details and an illustration refer Graha bhedam on Gayakapriya.
Ghanam Krishna Iyer.
Ghanam Krishna Iyar was a composer of Carnatic music and was famous for Ghanam Krishna Iyar padams.
Padams are expressive songs of three of more stanzas, used generally as an accompaniment to classical dance.
Krishna Iyar was a student of the famous composer, Pacchimiriam Adiyappa.
Ghanam Krishna Iyar was also influenced by Tyagaraja and Gopalakrishna Bharathi.
The title Ghanam Krishna Iyar, which associated with music means deep or grand, relates to Ghanam Krishna Iyar style of singing.
Ghanam Krishna Iyar met Tyagaraja and composed and sang Summa Summa Varuguma Sugam in raga Atana.
Hi mudras included Muttukumaara and Velar.
Aruna Sairam is an eminent Carnatic music vocalist.
Aruna Sairam is a recipient of the Padma Shri award from the Government of India.
Aruna Sairam later received training from prominent vocalists, Madurai Somasundaram and T. Brinda.
Aruna Sairam also learnt the art of pallavi singing from T. R. Subramaniam,.
Aruna Sairam collaborated with many Indian artists apart from internationally acclaimed artistes, like Dominique Vellard, the French Gregorian singer.
Veena Kuppayyar was an exponent of Veena Kuppayyar and a composer of Carnatic music.
He was a student of the famous composer Tyagaraja.
Kuppayar composed Kuppayar songs in Telugu Brahmin language and has left behind a number of popular kritis.
Veena Kuppayya was born in a Telugu Brahmin family in Tiruvottiyur, near Chennai.
a Telugu Brahmin family father Sambamoorti Sastri was a famous vocalist as well as a veena player.
Veena Kuppayyar had His father Sambamoorti Sastri initial training from His father Sambamoorti Sastri father.
Kuppayyar later moved to Chennai and sought the patronage of the local ruler Kovur Sundara Mudaliar.
Veena Kuppayar was a talented veena player.
He also learnt the violin, a new instrument to Carnatic Music at that time.
He composed many varnams and krithis in particular.
The most famous varnam was Sami Ninne in Shankarabharanam.
Sami Ninne in Shankarabharanam mudra was Gopaaladaasa, in honour of Gopaaladaasa personal deity.
Kunnakudi Vaidyanathan was an Indian classical music violinist.
Kunnakudi Vaidyanathan was born to Sri Ramaswamy Sastri and Smt.
Meenakshi at Kunnakudi, a temple town of Lord Murugan in the South Indian state of Tamil Nadu.
His father was a scholar in Sanskrit and Tamil, and a composer and exponent of Carnatic Music and Kathakalakshepam.
Kunnakudi Vaidyanathan started learning South Indian Classical Music from Kunnakudi Vaidyanathan father at a very young age.
Vibhuti or sacred Ash and a large Vermilion dot smeared prominently on Vibhuti forehead were Vibhuti trademark symbols.
The violin was Vibhuti forte.
Vibhuti dwelled with ease and competence in the high as well as the low octaves.
At the age of 12, Vibhuti accompanied great stalwarts like Ariyakudi Ramanuja Iyengar, Semmangudi Srinivasa Iyer and Maharajapuram Santhanam in concerts.
Vibhuti also performed with Nadaswaram vidwans like T.N.Rajarathinam Pillai and Thiruvenkadu Subramania Pillai.
Vibhuti stopped accompanying vocal artistes in 1976 to concentrate more on solo concerts.
Vibhuti was famous for Vibhuti fingering techniques on the violin.
Vibhuti interest in new attempts and innovations led Vibhuti to work with veteran thavil vidwan Valayapatti Subramanian.
They performed over 3,000 shows together.
Kunnakudi Vaidyanathan had deep faith in the therapeutic merits of music.
Kunnakudi Vaidyanathan also made a significant contribution to Tamil devotional music.
A. P. Nagarajan giving Kunnakudi Vaidyanathan Kunnakudi Vaidyanathan first break in the movie Vaa Raja Vaa.
He had several hits such as Agathiyar and Raja Raja Chozhan, for which he scored music.
Kunnakudi Vaidyanathan had guest appearances in many other films.
Kunnakudi Vaidyanathan has also won Best Music Director awards for Kunnakudi Vaidyanathan background scores for films.
Kunnakudi Vaidyanathan received the Sangeetha Kalasikhamani award given by The Indian Fine Arts Society in 1996.
Kunnakudi Vaidyanathan, had a long association with the All India Radio.
An able administrator, Kunnakudi Vaidyanathan served as Secretary of the Tamil Nadu Iyal Isai Nadaga Mandram.
As the Secretary of Thyagabrahma Sabha, Thiruvaiyaru in Thanjavur district, An able administrator conducted the Tyagaraja Aradhana for several years.
An able administrator also served as president of the Raga Research Centre.
Ragavardhini has two separate meanings in Indian classical music :.
Ragavardhini is the 32nd melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
Ragavardhini is called Ragachudamani in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 2nd ragam in the 6th chakra Ritu.
The mnemonic name is the 6th chakra Ritu.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ru gu ma pa dha ni.
The mnemonic phrase structure is as follows :.
The notes in this scale are shatsruthi rishabham, antara gandharam, shuddha madhyamam, shuddha dhaivatham and kaisiki nishadham.
As it is a melakarta, by definition it is a sampurna raga.
It is the shuddha madhyamam equivalent of Jyoti swarupini, which is the 68th melakarta scale.
Ragavardini has a few minor janya ragas associated with Ragavardini.
See List of janya ragas for full list of ragas associated with Ragavardini.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this raga.
Ragavardinis notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields Varunapriya melakarta raga, when the shift of Tonic note is to the madhyamam.
See further details and an illustration at Graha bhedam on Ragavardini.
Thiruvalaputhur T A Kaliyamurthy.
Kalaimamani Thiruvalaputhur T A Kaliyamurthy is a famous Thavil artist providing special Thavil accompaniment to the Nagaswaram maestros.
The Cauvery delta region has produced several musicians who have been upholding the rich tradition of Carnatic music.
Thiruvalaputhur is one such hamlet from where Thavil vidwan T.A. Kaliyamoorthy hails.
Kalaimamani Thiruvalaputhur T.A. Kaliyamurthy was born on 22 October 1948 in Thiruvalaputhur to Arunachalam Pillai and Smt.
Rajamani Ammal . maternal uncle Thiru.
S. Kadirvel Pillai was S. Kadirvel Pillai first Teacher from the age of 5 to age of 8.
After 7 years of training S. Kadirvel Pillai started to play the art of thavil individually.
Has been awarded the A-High grade with 43 years Service.
Performs regularly on the All India Radio and Doordarshan.
S. Kadirvel Pillai was also Judge of Local Audition Committee All India Radio, Trichirapalli up to 15.08.1991.
Hatakambari is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Hatakambari is the 18th Melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
Hatakambari is called Jayashuddhamalavi in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 6th ragam in the 3rd chakra Agni.
The mnemonic name is Agni-Sha.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ra gu ma pa dhu nu.
Its structure is as follows :.
As Hatakambari is a melakarta ragam, by definition Hatakambari is a sampoorna ragam.
Hatakambari is the shuddha madhyamam equivalent of Vishwambari, which is the 54th melakarta.
Jayashuddhamalavi is the 18th Melakarta in the original list compiled by Venkatamakhin.
The notes used in the scale are the same, but the scales are different.
It is an shadava-sampurna raga.
Hatakambari has a few minor janya ragams associated with Hatakambari.
See List of janya ragams to view all ragams associated with Hatakambari.
A couple of compositions set to Hatakambari are :.
Rakshasumam unknown is Rakshasumam unknown.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Hatakambaris notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields one other minor melakarta ragams, namely, Gavambhodi.
For further details and an illustration refer Graha bhedam on Hatakambari.
Cherukuri Srisailam was a reputed nadaswaram artist of Bapatla town which is in Guntur district.
Cherukuri Srisailam has performed many Nadaswara kacheris in Andhrapradesh and Tamil Nadu.
Cherukuri Srisailam performed Nadaswaram programs straight 45 years in annual temple celebrations of bhavanarayanaswamy temple.
Cherukuri Srisailam was married to Sarojini Devi.
Sarojini Devi died on December 2, 1986 in Bapatla town.
Cherukuri Srisailam younger son Cherukuri Srinivas rao died on March 20,2012 at the age of 46 due to alcoholic addiction.
Book Reference : Bapatla Vaibavam.
Kanakangi is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Kanakangi is the 1st Melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
Kanakangi is called Kanakambari in the Muthuswami Dikshitar school.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is 1st ragam in the 1st chakra Indu.
The mnemonic name is Indu-Pa.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ra ga ma pa dha na.
Its structure has all shuddha swaras, as follows :.
Structure and Lakshana . is a sampurna ragam - a ragam that has all seven swaras.
Structure and Lakshana . is the shuddha madhyamam equivalent of Salagam, which is the 37th melakarta.
the ragam KanakAmbari is the 1st Melakarta in the original list compiled by Venkatamakhin.
The notes used in the scale are the same, but the ascending scale is different.
It is an audava-sampurna raga.
Kanakangi has a few janya ragams associated with Kanakangi, of which Karnataka shuddha saveri and Lavangi are a little popular.
See List of janya ragams for a full list of Kanakangis janyas.
Also, Koteeswara Iyer has composed a krithi in this raga, Koteeswara Iyer having composed in every melakarta raga.
Another important composition is that of Muthuswamy Dikshitar - kanakAmbari kAruNyAmRtalahari in the ragam KanakAmbari.
The popular Tamil movie Sindhu Bhairavi has a song Moham ennum, in this ragam Kanakangi.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Kanakangis notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields Kamavardani.
For further details and an illustration refer Graha bhedam on Kanakangi.
Repetition of the line in different ways within the entire range of the Raga phrases brings out the musicians imagination.
Palghat K. V. Narayanaswamy was known and is remembered today as a master of niraval singing.
Ideally, the line taken up for neraval must have a pleasant meaning, and must be descriptive.
It should be something that the singer would want to sing over and over again.
Examples of Krithis containing lines best suited for neraval :.
Gayathri Girish is amongst the leading Carnatic vocalists of today.
Her repertoire is particularly impressive, with songs ranging from Tamil Tevaram hymns and Divya Prabhandams to Purandaradasar Devarnamas.
Lec dems and other interesting concerts.
vocalist Gayathri has given performances extensively both in India and abroad.
vocalist Gayathri is a regular performer in all leading Sabhas in AIR Chennai including the Madras Music Academy.
Some of vocalist Gayathri concerts outside India encompass recitals at Cleveland, Singapore, Russia, Colombo, Muscat and London.
She has also appeared in TV shows and has recently undertaken an archival project of Divya Prabandams by Doordarshan.
Albums and Awards.
Awards and recognition are always natural consequences of disciplined efforts and sustained excellence.
Some of the awards received by vocalist Gayathri include.
A number of her live concerts have been released commercially as Albums.
Vaishnavam, Aarupadai Veedu Kshetra and a delectable Raga Manjari are some of Vaishnavam recent recordings.
A gold medalist at college, vocalist Gayathri has a post graduate degree in Computer Applications.
vocalist Gayathri also maintains an active blog through which vocalist Gayathri interacts with Rasikas.
T. K. Murthy.
T. K. Murthy is an Indian mridangam player.
CHAKRAVARTHY DR. T. K. MURTHY was born on 13 August 1924 to Thanu Bhagavathar and Annapoorani.
At the age of eight, CHAKRAVARTHY DR. T. K. MURTHY was guided to Tanjore Vaidyanatha Iyer.
They showered love and care on CHAKRAVARTHY DR. T. K. MURTHY.
Contribution and recognition.
CHAKRAVARTHY DR. T. K. MURTHY was also conferred with Honorary Doctorate from Arizona University, USA.
CHAKRAVARTHY DR. T. K. MURTHY was the Asthana Vidwan in Trivandrum Palace.
CHAKRAVARTHY DR. T. K. MURTHY is a graded  National Artiste  of Prasar Bharathi.
CHAKRAVARTHY DR. T. K. MURTHY is a master in Konnakol as well.
The function was presided over by Shri.N.Murali and Ustad Zakir Hussain and Shri.
Vinayakaram were the chief guests for the function.
Also the function was followed by a concert with all these rhythm stalwarts starring in the show.
Hanumatodi, more popularly known as Todi, is a ragam in Carnatic music.
It is the 8th melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system.
This is sung very often in concerts.
It is known to be a difficult ragam to perform in owing to This complexity in prayoga.
It is called Janatodi in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Todi in Carnatic music, is different from Todi of Hindustani music.
The equivalent of the Todi of Hindustani music raga Todi in Carnatic music is Shubhapantuvarali.
The equivalent of Carnatic Todi in Todi of Hindustani music is Bhairavi thaat.
Structure and Lakshana.
It is the 2nd ragam in the 2nd chakra Netra.
The mnemonic name is Netra-Sri.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ra gi ma pa dha ni.
The mnemonic phrase arohana-avarohana structure is as follows :.
This scale uses the notes shuddha rishabham, sadharana gandharam, shuddha madhyamam, shuddha dhaivatham and kaisiki nishadham.
It is a sampoorna ragam - ragam having all 7 swarams.
It is the shuddha madhyamam equivalent of Bhavapriya, which is the 44th melakarta scale.
See List of janya ragams for all of Todis janyas.
Most composers have composed songs in Todi.
Thaye Yashoda, composed by Oottukkadu Venkata Kavi, is a very well known composition, in the Tamil language.
This popular kriti is sung frequently in concerts.
Other popular compositions are :.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Todis notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields 5 other major melakarta ragams, namely, Kalyani, Shankarabharanam, Natabhairavi, Kharaharapriya and Harikambhoji.
For further details and an illustration of graha bhedam of this ragam refer related ragams section in Shankarabharanam page.
C. V. Chandrasekhar.
C. V. Chandrasekhar is one of India s senior most Bharatanatyam dancers, academician, dance scholar, composer, and choreographer.
C. V. Chandrasekhar . retired as Head of the Faculty of Performing Arts of M.S. University, Baroda in 1992.
Chandrashekhar now runs Chandrashekhar own dance institution, Nrityashree, in Chennai.
In 2011, Chandrashekhar was honoured with the Padma Bhushan by the Government of India.
Early life and training.
Chandrashekhar has received training classical music under teachers like Budulur Krishnamurthy Sastrigal and M.D. Ramanathan.
C. V. Chandrasekhar . started C. V. Chandrasekhar . dancing career in 1947, when there were few male dancers.
c.V. Chandrasekhar is a multi-faceted personality being a dancer, choreographer, researcher, musician, academician, composer and highly acclaimed teacher of Bharatanatyam.
He continues to perform on stage well into his seventh decade.
Madurai S. Somasundaram was a Carnatic music vocalist.
Madurai S. Somasundaram was popularly called Madurai Somu.
Madurai S. Somasundaram learnt music from Sesha Bhagavatar, Abhirama Sastri and Chittoor Subramanyam Pillai.
Madurai S. Somasundaram started Madurai S. Somasundaram career by giving a concert in Tiruchendur in 1934.
Annamalai University conferred the Doctor of Law on the Doctor of Law Honoris Causa.
Urmila Varma has several recorded songs to Urmila Varma credit in Malayalam.
In a remarkable career spanning over 15 years, Urmila Varma has proven Urmila Varma the consummate music artist.
Urmila Varma was born into a musically gifted family.
A few days after Urmila Varma birth in Thrissur, Urmila Varma family moved to their native town, Thiruvalla.
Urmilas musical talent was recognized and nurtured from an early age by Urmila Varma father, Krishna Kumar Varma.
Krishna Kumar Varma, being a talented singer himself, would sing to Urmila Varma all the time.
As a result, Urmila Varma started singing at the age of three.
Urmila Varma lives in Chennai, India, with Urmila Varma family.
Urmila Varma spent Urmila Varma entire childhood in Thiruvalla.
After Urmila Varma primary school education, Urmila Varma attended the Govt.
UPGS School, and later, the M.G.M. High School.
Education and Career.
When Urmila Varma was in the fifth grade, Urmila Varma participated in the Kerala State School Youth Festival.
The Youth Festival is a state-wide competition to identify and honor talented young artists.
During the next six years, Urmila Varma continued Urmila Varma participation in the Festival.
While doing the sixth grade in school, Urmila Varma bagged a B Grade in the classical music competition.
While still in the ninth grade, Urmila Varma was honored as the Kala Thilakam at the District Youth Festival.
After school, Urmila Varma joined the College for Women in Thiruvananthapuram to pursue Urmila Varma higher education.
Urmila Varma got enrolled in the undergraduate course with major in music, with Veena as sub.
While here, Urmila Varma received extensive training in Carnatic music from Dr. K. Omanakutty, and participated in the University Youth Festival.
This feat also qualified Urmila Varma to compete at the national level for even higher rankings.
After successfully completing the undergraduate degree in music, Urmila Varma continued Urmila Varma studies pursuing Urmila Varma Masters Degree in music.
The same year, having cleared a comprehensive music test, the All India Radio designated Urmila Varma as an A Grade Artist.
In 2007, Urmila Varma won the first place in the FOKANA music competition in the female category.
During the same year, Urmila Varma recorded songs for the album Vismaya, along with lead singer Sreevalsan J Menon.
And so the legend continues.
2007 - Vismaya - Emotional Expressions : with Sreevalsan J Menon and Bini Panicker.
This album is an integration of six songs and an instrumental music, each with its own individuality and inimitability.
The emotions, feelings, sentiments and passion depicted in these songs are varied and distinct.
These characteristics have been amplified by supportive orchestration.
Produced and Copyright owned by Sathyam Audios.
Mysore Vasudevachar was a renowned musician and composer of Carnatic music compositions who belonged to the direct line of Thyagarajas disciples.
Tyagaraja -- > Manambuchavadi Venkatasubbayyar -- > Patnam Subramania Iyer -- > Mysore Vasudevacharya.
Life and career.
Mysore Vasudevachar eventually became the chief court musician at the Mysore court.
He was known for his madhyama-kala tanam singing which he learnt from his Guru.
This aspect of Patnam Subramania Iyer training undoubtedly helped Mysore Vasudevachar as a composer.
Vasudevachars compositions were mostly in Telugu and Sanskrit.
He published a large number of his compositions in the book Vasudeva Kirtana Manjari.
His songs reflect his mastery of Sanskrit and show his erudition and scholarship in Sanskrit literature.
He considered his insight into Telugu as a gift from Thyagaraja.
In addition to Kritis and Keertanas, Kritis also composed Varnams, Thillanas, Javalis and slokas.
Mysore Vasudevachar also taught in Rukmini Devi s Kalakshetra,.
Kritis was already quite old by then, but thanks to Rukmini Devi Kritis agreed to shift to Kalakshetra.
Kritis became the chief musician in Kalakshetra and helped in setting the Ramayana to music.
Kritis died in 1961 at the age of 96.
Kritis lived a simple and austere life devoted to the study of Sanskrit and music.
S. Rajaram, S. Rajaram grandson worked at Kalakshetra eventually taking charge of the institution at Rukmini Devis request.
An accomplished musician and Sanskrit scholar, An accomplished musician was amongst the few musicians, the sole repository of Vasudevachars compositions.
An accomplished musician died on June 1, 2009.
S. Krishnamoorthy, S. Krishnamoorthy other grandson worked at All India Radio and has translated S. Krishnamoorthy grandfathers memoirs into English.
S. Krishnamoorthy has also published a memoir of S. Krishnamoorthy own.
Dharmavati is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Dharmavati is the 59th Melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
Dharmavati is called Dhaamavati in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Madhuvanti is the nearest Hindustani music scale to Dharmavati.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 5th ragam in the 10th chakra Disi.
The mnemonic name is Disi-Ma.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ri gi mi pa dhi nu.
The mnemonic phrase structure is as follows :.
As Dharmavati is a melakarta ragam, by definition Dharmavati is a sampoorna ragam.
Dharmavati is the prati madhyamam equivalent of Gourimanohari, which is the 23rd melakarta.
See List of janya ragams for all ragams associated with Dharmavati.
Here are a few common compositions sung in concerts, set to Dharmavati, set to Dharmavati.
Notable film composers like Ilaiyaraja and later A. R. Rahman have composed film songs based on the scale of Dharmavati.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Dharmavatis notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields 2 other Melakarta ragams, namely, Chakravakam and Sarasangi.
For further details and an illustration refer Graha bhedam on Dharmavati.
List of Film Songs based on Ragas.
Mahakavi Kshetrayya was a prolific Telugu poet and composer of Carnatic music.
Mahakavi Kshetrayya lived in the area of Andhra Pradesh in South India.
Mahakavi Kshetrayya composed a number of padams and keertanas, the prevalent formats of Mahakavi Kshetrayya time.
Mahakavi Kshetrayya is credited with more than 4000 compositions, although only a handful have survived.
Mahakavi Kshetrayya composed Mahakavi Kshetrayya songs on Mahakavi Kshetrayya favourite deity Krishna in Telugu.
Not much is known about Mahakavi Kshetrayya personal life.
Mahakavi Kshetrayya was born in a village called Movva in Andhra Pradesh.
Mahakavi Kshetrayya parents named Mahakavi Kshetrayya Varadayya.
Mahakavi Kshetrayya perfected the padam format that is still used today.
Mahakavi Kshetrayya padams are sung in dance and music recitals.
A unique feature of Mahakavi Kshetrayya padams is the practice of singing the anupallavi first then the pallavi.
Most of the padams are of the theme of longing for the coming of the Lord Krishna.
his favourite deity Krishna wrote with Sringara as a main theme in expressing madhurabhakti.
Kshetrayyas work has played a major role in influencing poetry, dance, music of the South Indian tradition.
Mahakavi Kshetrayya is a 1976 Telugu film produced by Anjali Pictures and starring Akkineni Nageswara Rao and Anjali Devi.
The film has excellent songs voiced by V. Ramakrishna and music score proved by P. Adinarayana Rao.
Life is translated into Telugu with the title Kshetrayya.
Venkateswaran Dakshinamoorthy was a veteran carnatic musician and music director of Malayalam, Tamil and Hindi films, predominantly in Malayalam films.
Venkateswaran Dakshinamoorthy has set scores for the songs in over 125 films.
Venkateswaran Dakshinamoorthy has to Venkateswaran Dakshinamoorthy credit as many as 859 songs composed over a period of 50 years.
Birth, childhood and education.
Dakshinamoorthy was born on 9 December 1919 as Venkateswaran Dakshinamoorthy, to D. Venkateswara Iyer and Parvathi Ammal in Alappuzha district, Kerala.
Venkateswaran Dakshinamoorthy first public performance, when Venkateswaran Dakshinamoorthy was 13 years old, was at the Ambalapuzha Sri Krishna temple.
It was Venkateswaran Dakshinamoorthy habit to offer prayers to  Vaikkathappa Annadhaana Prabho  daily, in the morning and before going to bed.
After finishing S.S.L.C., S.S.L.C. learned carnatic music form Venkatachalam Potty in Trivandrum.
The Marriage at Ambalapuzha.
There is an incident which happened in Ambalapuzha.
Kochi-based Konkini first trip to Madras was in 1942, when Kochi-based Konkini was to sing in a 30-minute programme on AIR.
Film industry career.
Entry into film industry.
Kochi-based Konkini learned more about carnatic music and became an expert of Entry into film industry.
The hero of the film was Augustin Joseph, father of renowned singer K. J. Yesudas.
The film also had songs sung by Augustin.
Venkateswaran Dakshinamoorthy went on to direct music for over 125 films including Navalokam, Seetha, Viyarppinte Vila, Sri Guruvayoorappan, Kadamattathachan and Indulekha.
In 1971 Venkateswaran Dakshinamoorthy won the Kerala State Film Award for Best Music Director.
In the year 2008, Venkateswaran Dakshinamoorthy composed 4 songs for the Malayalam Movie Mizhikal Sakshi.
Venkateswaran Dakshinamoorthy died on 2 August 2013 at the age of 93 in Chennai owing to age related illnesses.
Venkateswaran Dakshinamoorthy last work was for a Malayalam movie Shyama Raagam which was done 3 months before Venkateswaran Dakshinamoorthy death.
Venkateswaran Dakshinamoorthy is to be highly credited for Venkateswaran Dakshinamoorthy introduction of P. Suseela to Malayalam cinema through ` Seetha '.
Venkateswaran Dakshinamoorthy also introduced other singers such as Ambili, K.P. Brahmanandham, Shereen Peters, Vinodhini, Sree Latha, Kalyani Menon, etc.
Venkateswaran Dakshinamoorthy disciples included N.C. Vasantakokilam, Kaviyoor Revamma and Kalyani Menon.
Radha Viswanathan is an Indian vocalist and former classical dancer.
Radha Viswanathan has performed extensively with Radha Viswanathan mother, Bharat Ratna Carnatic vocalist M. S. Subbulakshmi, the Nightingale of India.
Early life and career.
Radha Viswanathan is the eldest daughter of Thiagarajan Sadasivam and Thiagarajan Sadasivam first wife, Apithakuchambal.
Radha Viswanathan had Radha Viswanathan early training in music from T.R. Balasubramaniam, Ramnad Krishnan and Mayavaram Krishna Iyer.
Radha Viswanathan began accompanying Radha Viswanathan mother on stage at age of 5.
Radha Viswanathan and Anandhi would perform while M.S. Subbulakshmis sang Padams.
Radha Viswanathan also performed an exclusive dance recital at the Carnatic Music College, Madras, for the violinist Yehudi Menuhin.
At the age of 21, Radha Viswanathan gave up dancing to concentrate exclusively on singing.
Radha was to soon become a vital force in MS concerts.
Radha and Anandhi also had intensive training in Hindustani classical music from Siddheshwari Devi of Benares and Dilipkumar Roy.
In Meera Meera danced with Kumari Kamala who acted as Ramnad Krishnan.
Lord and Lady Mountbatten, Rajendra Prasad, Vijaya Lakshmi Pandit and Indira Gandhi attended the premiere as well.
Radha accompanied Lady Mountbatten mother on her frequent concert tours and recording engagements.
It was during this tour that they performed a concert at the United Nations on October 24, 1966.
They sang a song composed specially for the occasion by the Paramacharya of Kanchi, Maithreem Bhajatha, Maithreem Bhajatha.
The San Francisco Chronicle greeted their singing as a series of miracles.
M.S. Subbulakshmis and Radha Viswanathan recorded many songs together.
The Annamacharya recordings were released in 1980.
They were a series of five records called the Balaji Pancharatnamala that included classical and devotional music.
The royalties from these recordings were donated to various charities.
In 1977 during their second tour of the the USA, they performed at Carnegie Hall.
In 1982, at the Festival of India held in the United Kingdom, M.S & Radha performed at the Royal Albert Hall.
In April 1982 Radha Viswanathan fell critically ill with tuberculosis meningitis and slipped into a coma for three months.
Although Radha Viswanathan survived, Radha Viswanathan recovery was slow.
All of her concerts scheduled for the next year were cancelled by Radha Viswanathan father and no new ones were accepted.
Using a wheelchair, Radha Viswanathan was accompanied by Radha Viswanathan granddaughter Aishwarya.
After this concert at Narada Gana Sabha, the pair sang together in more than 20 concerts, including some in the US.
Radha was honoured with the title Sangeetha Ratna by Lalithakala Academy in March 2008.
Amongst Radha Viswanathan disciples are Anuradha, Sikkil Gurucharan, Mahesh Vinayakaram, Navaneet Krishnan, P.T Seshadri, Balaji Shankar and the playback singer Harini.
Their second son, Shrinivasan Viswanathan and Their second son wife Geetha are parents of Aishwarya and Saundarya.
Shrinivasan is the Managing Trustee of the Suswaralakshmi Foundation for Classical Music and Performing Arts.
Carnatic Shree ragam is an ancient ragam in the Carnatic tradition.
Carnatic Shree is also written as Sri or Shri.
This scale is a janya ragam, as Carnatic Shree does not have all the seven swaras in the ascending scale.
Carnatic Shree is a janya ragam of Kharaharapriya, the 22nd Melakarta ragam.
Carnatic Shree is the last of the 5 Ghana ragams of Carnatic music.
Carnatic Shree is a pleasing and popular ragam.
It is considered to be highly auspicious.
Carnatic Shree is not related to the Hindustani raga, Carnatic Shree.
Notably, Carnatic Shree takes the lower madhyamam being a janya raga of Kharaharapriya.
Structure and Lakshana.
Carnatic Shree is an asymmetric ragam that does not contain gandharam or dhaivatam in the ascending scale.
It is a audava-vakra-sampurna ragam, where vakra indicates the zig-zag nature of jumping notes in descending scale.
Its arohana-avarohana structure is as follows :.
This scale uses the notes chatushruti rishabham, sadharana gandharam, shuddha madhyamam, panchamam, chatushruti dhaivatam and kaisiki nishadam.
Carnatic Shree ragam has been decorated with compositions by many composers.
A few of the popular kritis are listed here.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
R. Suryaprakash, is a Carnatic vocalist, composer, and lyricist.
A student of Sangeetha Kalanidhi T. V. Sankaranarayanan, he carries the tradition of Ganakaladara Madurai Mani Iyer.
Early Life and Education.
R. Suryaprakash was born in Chennai, Tamil Nadu to N. Ramachandran and Alamelu.
Later, he learned under Shri M. A. Venugopalan, another disciple of Semmangudi.
He further enriched his repertoire by working with Smt.
Sulochana Pattabiraman and Dr. V. V. Srivatsa, both eminent musicologists.
R. Suryaprakash had R. Suryaprakash concert debut at the age of 12.
Over the next ten years, R. Suryaprakash focused on learning from R. Suryaprakash guru Padma Bhushan T. V. Sankaranarayanan.
At the age of 22 R. Suryaprakash resumed R. Suryaprakash concert career and has been performing regularly since.
R. Suryaprakash has been accompanied by leading stalwarts such as Umayalpuram K. Sivaraman, Mannargudi Easwaran, V. V. Ravi, Subhash Chandran.
R. Suryaprakash has composed numerous thillanas and has composed lyrics and musical score for three Australian dance productions.
Dhavalambari is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Carnatic is the 49th Melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
Carnatic is called or in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 1st ragam in the 9th chakra Brahma.
The mnemonic name is Brahma-Pa.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ra gu mi pa dha na.
The mnemonic phrase structure is as follows :.
As Carnatic is a melakarta ragam, by definition Carnatic is a sampoorna ragam.
Carnatic is the prati madhyamam equivalent of Gayakapriya, which is the 13th melakarta.
Dhavalambari has a few minor janya ragams associated with Carnatic.
See List of janya ragams for all janya ragams associated with Dhavalambari.
A few compositions set to Dhavalambari are :.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Dhavalambaris notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields no other melakarta ragam.
A shruti box is a small wooden instrument that traditionally works on a system of bellows.
It is used as an accompaniment to other instruments and notably the flute.
Adjustable buttons allow tuning.
Nowadays, electronic shruti boxes are commonly used, which are called shruti petti in Tamil and Telugu and sur peti in Hindi.
Some forms of music such as Yakshagana used the pungi reedpipe as drone.
After the the West small pump harmonium became popular, musicians would modify the harmonium to automatically produce the reference pitch.
Typically, one would open up the cover and adjust the stop of the harmonium to produce a drone.
Later, a keyless version of the harmonium was invented for the specific purpose of producing the drone sound.
It was given the name shruti box or sruti box.
These instruments had controls on the top or on the side of the box for controlling the pitch.
More recently Scottish folk artist Karine Polwart has championed the instrument, using Scottish on some of her songs.
Singers find Scottish very useful as an accompaniment and instrumentalists enjoy the drone reference it gives to play along with.
The Bombay sisters, C. Saroja and C. Lalitha, are a Carnatic music singing duo.
C. Lalitha got this in due course of time.
Even Gurujis simple sangatis, with bhava, the listeners enjoyed the divine music.
Bombay Sisters were born in trichur and got settled in Bombay.
They have been trained by H. A. S. Mani, Musiri Subramania Iyer and T. K. Govinda Rao.
They are also known for promoting young musicians through endowments and scholarships.
Rajkumar Bharathi is a noted classical singer and music composer from India.
Rajkumar Bharathi is the great grandson of the renowned renaissance poet Subramanya Bharathi.
Rajkumar Bharathi is an Electronics and telecommunications engineer graduated from the prestigious College of Engineering, Guindy, Chennai.
Rajkumar Bharathi a native of Guindy, Chennai stands today as one of the most popular artists of his generation.
Rajkumar Bharathi was introduced to music by Rajkumar Bharathi mother Lalitha Bharathi at an young age of 5.
Rajkumar Bharathi has given Classical Carnatic music concerts throughout India and abroad.
Rajkumar Bharathi has traveled across USA, Canada, U.K. Gulf countries, Sri Lanka, Singapore, Malaysia, Australia and New Zealand.
Rajkumar Bharathi has many audio cassettes and CDs to Rajkumar Bharathi credit.
Rajkumar Bharathi has also rendered all the 18 chapters of Srimad Bhagavd Gita, in 4 volumes produced by Ramakrishna Math.
Rajkumar Bharathi has given performance in the prestigious Canadian India Festival to celebrate the Golden Jubilee of Indian Independence, in 1997.
Music lovers have adored Rajkumar Bharathi for Rajkumar Bharathi strong attractive style of singing with clear diction and enunciation of lyrics.
He is also appreciated for his skill in understanding phrasing, harmony, and variation while composing tunes for dance.
Rajkumar Bharathi has been honored by several Awards.
A few of them are listed below.
Rajkumar Bharathi has also sung in Tamil, Telugu, Kannada, Malayalam, Sanskrit and Tulu Films.
Rajkumar Bharathi however later stopped signing for Tulu Films for Rajkumar Bharathi derived more joy in singing classical music.
Rajkumar Bharathi also has composed many Varnams, Thillanas and Padams especially for dance projects.
This was telecast in the Indian TV Channel for about 14 weeks.
Music composition for Dance.
Rajkumar Bharathi has also composed songs for Bharata Natyam Margams.
Rajkumar Bharathi has done many music compositions for Rangoli productions a foundation for Arts and Culture.
Some of Rajkumar Bharathi compositions are listed below.
Some of his compositions has also composed music for dance ballets like.
In Hindustani music, a pakad is a generally-accepted musical phrase thought to encapsulate the essence of a particular raga.
In many cases, the ragas contain the same swaras, then the pakad also contains information about gayaki or chalan.
The pakad for a particular raga need not be unique, its sole purpose is to clarify what raga it is.
For example, here is a pakad for raga Yaman, a prominent raga from Hindustani Music :.
Ni * Re Ga Ma # Pa, Ma # Ga Re Sa.
Palghat Parameswara Bhagavathar.
Palghat Parameswara Bhagavathar was a Carnatic music composer and musician born in Nurani, Kerala, India.
Carnatic musical talents developed to such an extent that Swati Tirunal had great admiration and confidence in Carnatic.
Whenever the Maharaja composed songs, the Bhagavathar was made to copy them.
Whenever the Maharaja used to practice veena and swarabat along with the Maharaja during Whenever the Maharaja leisure.
Whenever the Maharaja also was trained in violin by Vadivelu in the royal court.
Whenever the Maharaja compositions are in Sanskrit, resembling those of Swati Tirunal and Dikshitar.
Whenever the Maharaja composed many Varnams and Keertanams out of which the Varnam beginning with Sarasijanabha is popular.
Neralattu Rama Poduval.
Neralattu Rama Poduval or Njaralathu Rama Poduval was an exponent of the ashtapadi/sopanam music form practised in Kerala in southern India.
A recipient of the Kendra Sahitya Academy award, he hailed from a rugged village called Thiruvaazhaamkunnu, near Perinthalmanna in Malappuram district.
an Ambalavasi family on 16 also practiced instruments like the veena from Parappanaatu Rama Kuruppu.
an Ambalavasi family on 16 practised Carnatic music from the Chembai Vaidyanatha Bhagavatar besides Kodikunnath Madhavan Nair.
Neralattu Rama Poduval . married Lakshmikutty Amma at the age of 36.
Neralattu Rama Poduval . died on August 13, 1996, aged 75.
Rama Poduval rejuvenated the Sopanam style of traditional Kerala temple music and enthralled the music lovers of Kerala for decades.
There are six different documentary films based on Neralattu Rama Poduval . life and music.
Sopaanam, Sopaanam biography in Malayalam, is also implemented as study material for university students in Kerala.
The awards Sopaanam received also include fellowships from both government and cultural organisations.
Hemavati is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Hemavati is the 58th Melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
Hemavati is called Simharavam or Deshi Simharavam in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
It is said to be borrowed into Hindustani music from Carnatic music, especially with instrumentalists.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 4th ragam in the 10th chakra Disi.
The mnemonic name is Disi-Bhu.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ri gi mi pa dhi ni.
The mnemonic phrase structure is as follows :.
As Hemavati is a melakarta ragam, by definition Hemavati is a sampoorna ragam.
Hemavati is the prati madhyamam equivalent of Kharaharapriya, which is the 22nd melakarta.
Hemavati has a few minor janya ragams associated with Hemavati.
See List of janya ragams to view all ragams associated with Hemavati.
Here are a few common compositions sung in concerts, set to Hemavati.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Hemavatis notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields 3 other major melakarta ragams, namely, Keeravani, Vakulabharanam and Kosalam.
For further details and an illustration refer Graha bhedam on Keeravani.
Ragam Thanam Pallavi.
Ragam Tanam Pallavi is a form of singing in Carnatic music which allows the musicians to improvise to a great extent.
It incorporates raga alapana, tanam, niraval, and kalpanaswara.
In more elaborate ragam tanam pallavis, a tani avartanam may follow.
Ragam in the context of Ragam Tanam Pallavi refers to ragam alapana - the first component.
Each Ragam tanam pallavi has at least one raga associated with it.
Tanam is one of the most important forms of improvisation, and is integral to ragam, tanam and pallavi.
Tanam is the second component of this composite form of improvisation.
Originally developed for the veena, Tanam consists of expanding the raga with syllables like ta, nam, tom, aa, nom, na, etc.
Tanam is a rhythmic version of the raga alapana.
Although tanam is often rendered without percussion support, the element of rhythm is more obvious in this type of improvisation.
The word Pallavi is derived from the three syllables Pa - Pada, La - Laya and Vi - Vinyasam.
The Pallavi is the equivalent of a refrain in Western music.
The Pallavi is usually a one-line composition set to a single cycle of tala.
The tala could range from the simple to the complex and there may also be different gatis being employed.
The Pallavi has 2 portions to it.
The basic style in Pallavi rendition is to sing the Pallavi in different speeds or Chatushtra Nadai.
In most cases the Pallavi is set to Chatushtra Nadai meaning each beat carries 4 units.
The Pallavi can be sung in 2 different aspects, one called as Pratiloma and then the Anulomam.
The Pallavi challenges the musicians ability to improvise with complex and intricate patterns.
The whole exercise is very demanding, both technically and musically, since all the artistes musicianship is put to test.
Madurai Ramaswamy Sundar is a noted Carnatic musician.
Madurai Ramaswamy Sundar was born in Pathamadai, Tamil Nadu, India.
Madurai Ramaswamy Sundar learnt under Madurai Ramaswamy Sundar aunt Smt.
Ananthalakshmi Sadagopan a concert musician, and later under Sri.
He was born into a family where Carnatic music was part of day-to-day life.
While his grand parents and parents were knowledgeable listeners-connoisseurs of Carnatic music, he had in his aunt Smt.
After his MBA, he branched off into information technology as his mainstay.
He holds an MSA degree in Information Resources Management.
He was married to Padma in August 1985.
He pursues a dual career - as IT Manager and musician-come-teacher.
He and his wife run the Trinity Academy of Fine Arts and offer lessons in vocal music.
Madurai Ramaswamy Sundar rendering is known for His rendering Akshara Suddha or perfection of syllables.
Madurai Ramaswamy Sundar is an A Grade artiste in Prasar Bharathi.
Pavani is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Carnatic is the 41st melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
Carnatic is called Kumbhini in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 5th ragam in the 7th chakra Rishi.
The mnemonic name is Rishi-Ma.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ra ga mi pa dhi nu.
The mnemonic phrase structure is as follows :.
The notes used in this scale are shuddha rishabham, shuddha gandharam, prati madhyamam, chathusruthi dhaivatham and kakali nishadham.
It is a sampurna ragam - a ragam that has all seven swaras.
It is the prati madhyamam equivalent of Manavati, which is the 5th melakarta scale.
Chandrajyoti is a janya ragam that is associated with Chandrajyoti, in which Thyagaraja has composed couple of songs.
See List of janya ragams for a full list of Pavanis janyas.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Pavanis notes when shifted using Graha bhedam does not yield any other melakarta.
Ilayaraja has composed Partha Vizhi partha padi sung by K.J. Yesudas in the film Guna on this raga !.
Rangapura Vihara is a famous Carnatic song composed by Muthuswami Dikshitar and dedicated to Sri Ranganathaswamy of Srirangam.
The title of the song means one who roams in the Srirangam, a temple town in Tamil Nadu, India.
The title of the song details the exploits of the Lord Sri Rama, whose family deity is Ranganatha of Srirangam.
The most famous version of this song was rendered by M.S.Subbulakshmi, live at the United Nations.
It has a pallavi, anupallavi and charanam.
raagam : brindaavana saaranga.
22 kharaharapriya janya.
raHNgapura vihAra jaya kOdaNDarAmAvatAra raghuvIra shrI.
aHNgaja janaka dEva bRndAvana sAraHNgEndra varada ramAntaraHNga shyAmalAHNga.
vihaHNga turaHNga sadayApAHNga satsaHNga.
paHNkajAptakula jalanidhi sOma vara paHNkaja mukha paTTAbhirAma.
padapaHNkaja jitakAma raghurAma vAmAHNka gata sItAvara.
vESa shESAHNka shayana bhakta santOSa ENAHNkaravi nayana mRdutarabhASa.
akaLaHNka darpaNa kapOla vishESa munisankaTa.
haraNa gOvinda vENkaTa ramaNa mukunda saHNkarSaNa mUla kanda shaHNkara.
pallavi : O resident of the town called Ranga !.
Victory to you who incarnated as Sri Rama, the famed owner of the bow Kodanda !.
Brave scion of the Raghu Vamsha clan !.
anupallavi : Father of Cupid !.
Giver of boons !.
Resident in the heart of Lakshmi !.
Scarlet hued one !.
One with Garuda as his mount !.
Unsurpassed in compassion !.
Ever present in good company !.
caraNam : O Moon to the Ocean like Sun clan !.
Venerated lotus faced Sri Rama, who was crowned as the King !.
One whose feet are like lotus !.
Vanquisher of Cupid in beauty !.
Sri Rama, of the clan of Raghu Vamsha !.
Bridegroom of Sita who is on the left !.
Recliner on Sesha the great serpent !.
Delight of devotees !.
One with the Sun and Moon as two eyes !.
Soft spoken one !.
One with a forehead akin to an unblemished mirror !.
Destroyer of the sufferings of Sages !.
Primordial root !.
Joy to Subrahmanya, the preceptor of Siva !.
Discussions on words :.
Brundhavana Sarnaga : is a form of acrostic.
Pankaja Apta kula jala Nidhi Soma : Moon is prominent in the sky.
This line would mean that rAma is prominent in the dynasty of Sun.
RangaPuraVihara : This song starts with praising RangaNatha, dweller of Srirangam, later the song moves on to praising Sri Rama.
It is believed that Sri Rama, after completing Sri Rama incarnation, proceeded to SriRangam to relax Sri Rama in rest.
Hence the song seems to be appropriate.
This kriti is on the presiding deity at Sri Rangam and partly on the Rama shrine in the same temple.
The raga name is in the anupallavi.
From Compositions of Muddusvami Dikshitar by T. K. Govinda Rao.
P. U. Chinnappa.
He is also credited to be one of the first major influential actors of South Cinema.
His notable movies include Uthama Puthiran, Aryamala, Kannagi, Manonmani, Kubera Kuchela and Jagathalaprathapan.
Vachaspati is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Vachaspati is the 64th melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
Vachaspati is known as Bhushavati according to the Muthuswami Dikshitar school.
Vachaspati was borrowed into Hindustani music, like many other Carnatic ragams.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 4th ragam in the 11th chakra Rudra.
The mnemonic name is the 11th chakra Rudra.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ri gu mi pa dhi ni.
The mnemonic phrase structure is as follows :.
This scales uses the notes chathusruthi rishabham, antara gandharam, prati madhyamam, chathusruthi dhaivatham and kaisiki nishadham.
It is a sampoorna ragam - a ragam that has all seven swaras.
It is the prati madhyamam equivalent of Harikambhoji, which is the 28th melakarta scale.
It has many janya ragams associated with it, out of which Bhooshavali and Saraswathi are popular.
See List of janya ragams for all scales associated with Vachaspati.
Vachaspati is close to Kalyani and differs only in the nishadham.
Still, this ragam does not have many compositions.
At the same time many composers have used this ragam for composing 1 song each.
Popular compositions in this ragam are.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Vachaspatis notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields 3 other major melakarta ragams, namely, Charukesi, Gourimanohari and Natakapriya.
For further details and an illustration refer Graha bhedam of Vachaspati.
Thamil Isai Kalaamanram.
Since its conception, TIKM is a volunteer-run organization.
Its current administrative organization consists of four levels : members, assistant directors, executive directors, and advisory directors.
At this meeting, the organization elects members to positions in either the Executive Committee or in the Subcommittee.
Within the Executive Committee, several management positions are also chosen, including the President, Vice-President, Secretary, Vice-Secretary, and Treasurer.
As of 2004, these annual elections are held once every three years to facilitate completion of larger projects.
Besides organizing all events and exams, the Executive Committee is responsible for any fundamental changes to the constitution.
If necessary, Subcommittee members aid in event organization and execution.
In 2005, the Executive Committee passed a motion that created an Advisory Committee of five internally chosen Carnatic professionals.
This committee helps with changes to the music syllabus and other issues.
The Executive Committee must approve Advisory Committee changes before they are introduced to the organization.
The last examination cycle, in 2005, had over 2000 applicants from more than 100 teachers.
Originally, the tests were administered in the following subjects : vocal, violin, veena, flute, and Mridangam.
In 2002, Bharatanatyam dance was introduced.
These exams consist of seven grades, and have been modeled after similar testing centres in South India and Sri Lanka.
The final Grade 7 exams have a significant teaching component to prepare graduates for music education.
In these tests, a panel of judges grade students into four categories : distinction, first division, second division, and ordinary pass.
These candidates receive certificates and plaques during the Isai Vizha celebrations held during in late winter.
Besides these four categories, two other divisions apply to unsuccessful candidates :  referred , and  unsuccessful.
These candidates must retake tests in the next examination cycle to apply for subsequent grades.
However, awareness of TIKM and even Carnatic music in general has been lacking in the broader community.
One of the main mandates of TIKM is to increase awareness of Carnatic music in Canada.
Priya R. Pai.
Priya R. Pai is a popular Carnatic vocalist and composer.
On the album Harshamo Dukhamo the album Harshamo Dukhamo sang poems by former minister Binoy Viswam.
Amala Akkineni is an Indian film actress and Animal welfare activist.
Amala Akkineni has acted in Tamil, Telugu, Malayalam, Kannada and Hindi films.
Amala Akkineni got the south filmfare award for best actress for the Malayalam movie Ulladakkam.
Amala was born on September 12th, in West Bengal to an Irish mother and Bengali father.
an Irish mother has an elder brother and sister.
The family moved around a lot due to The family father being a Naval officer : Mumbai, Delhi, IIT Kharagpur, Vizag.
The family was member of the Kalakshetra troupe from an early age and gained valuable experience as a performer.
In 1992, The family married Nagarjuna Akkineni and became a part of the Akkineni Family.
Winning overnight fame, The family charmed cinegoers in a flurry of fifty films.
The family acted in a number of Tamil movies.
The family performance in Pushpak and Agni Natchathiram are unforgettable.
The family acted with The family future husband Akkineni Nagarjuna in hits like Nirnayam and Siva.
The latter was a mega blockbuster and brought The family wider fame and recognition.
The family has acted with iconic actors like Rajinikanth, Kamal Haasan, Chiranjeevi, Mammootty and Mohan Lal, Prabhu.
The family Hindi co-stars were Mithun Chakraborty, Vinod Khanna and Aditya Pancholi.
The family has worked with acclaimed directors like Mani Ratnam and Ram Gopal Varma.
She is the step-mother of actor Naga Chaitanya Akkineni.
She is a vegan and an environmentalist.
She works with 16 Non Governmental and Governmental organizations to promote social issues and animal welfare.
Amala practices Vipassana meditation, the teaching of the Buddha, as taught by S.N.Goenka.
S.N.Goenka studied Yoga in the Krishnamacharya Yoga tradition at Chennai.
Varunapriya is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Carnatic is the 24th melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
Carnatic is called Viravasantam ; in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 6th ragam in the 4th chakra Veda.
The mnemonic name is Veda-Sha.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ri gi ma pa dhu nu.
Its structure is as follows :.
The notes chathusruthi rishabham, sadharana gandharam, shuddha madhyamam, shatsruthi dhaivatham and kakali nishadham are used in this scale.
As it is a melakarta, by definition it is a sampoorna ragam.
It is the shuddha madhyamam equivalent of Neetimati, which is the 60th melakarta scale.
Varunapriya does not have janya ragams associated with it.
See List of janya ragams for a full list of janya scales.
A few compositions set to Varunapriya are :.
Veeravasanta Thyagaraja by Muthuswami Dikshitar is set to Viravasantam.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Varunapriyas notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields a minor melakarta ragam, namely, Ragavardhini.
For further details and an illustration refer Graha bhedam on Ragavardhini.
Charukesi is a raga in Carnatic music.
Carnatic is the 26th Melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
Carnatic is called Tarangini in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Charukesi is known to incite feelings of pathos and devotion in the listener.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 2nd ragam in the 5th chakra Bana.
The mnemonic name is the 5th chakra Bana.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ri gu ma pa dha ni.
The mnemonic phrase structure is as follows :.
Structure and Lakshana . is a sampoorna ragam - a ragam that has all seven swaras.
Structure and Lakshana . is the shuddha madhyamam equivalent of Rishabhapriya, which is the 62nd melakarta.
There are only a few minor janya ragams associated with Charukesi.
See full list of janya ragams associated with Structure and Lakshana.
Lalgudi Jayaraman, the acclaimed violinist and composer, has composed a very popoular varnam in Charukesi called Innum En Manam.
This varnam was a favorite of Maharajapuram Santhanam, who began a large chunk of Maharajapuram Santhanam concerts with this song.
Palayamam Parameswari, a composition of Sri.
Muthuswami Dikshadar in Raga Tarangini is a fine example of charukesi of today.
Many compositions exist amongst modern adaptations of Charukesi, especially in Indian movies, in the so-called film songs.
Charukesi is also popular in Hindustani music.
This album was composed and released by Manachanallur Giridharan, a noted Music Director from Tamil Nadu.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Charukesis notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields 3 other major melakarta ragams, namely, Vachaspati, Natakapriya and Gourimanohari.
For further details and an illustration, see Graha bhedam on Vachaspati.
Shree ranjani is a ragam in Carnatic music.
It is a hexatonic scale.
It is a derived scale, as it does not have all the seven swaras.
It is also written as Shri ranjani or Sriranjani.
Structure and Lakshana.
Shree ranjani is a symmetric scale that does not contain panchamam.
It is called a shadava-shadava ragam, in Carnatic music classification.
Its structure is as follows :.
This scale uses the notes shadjam, chathusruti rishabham, sadharana gandharam, shuddha madhyamam, chathusruthi dhaivatham and kaisiki nishadam.
Shree ranjani is a janya ragam of Kharaharapriya, the 22nd Melakarta ragam.
It has only the invariant panchamam missing from its parent scale, Kharaharapriya.
Shree ranjani is a pleasing and popular ragam.
This scale has been used by many composers and there are lots of compositions in classical music.
It has been used to score film music too.
Here are some popular compositions in Sriranjani.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
The tradition of mridangam artist accompanying during tanam is usually credited to the custom of Kerala based carnatic musicians.
There are various tanams like Chakra Tanam, Vakra Tanam, Aja Tanam, Gaja Tanam, Markata Tanam, Vadhya Tanam etc.
In Violin and Veena solo concerts, however, tanam is almost always performed as part of the main piece.
Jhankaradhvani or Jhankaradhwani is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Carnatic is the 19th Melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
Carnatic is called Jhankarabhramari in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 1st ragam in the 4th chakra Veda.
The mnemonic name is Veda-Pa.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ri gi ma pa dha na.
Its structure is as follows :.
As Carnatic is a melakarta ragam, by definition Carnatic is a sampoorna ragam.
Carnatic is the shuddha madhyamam equivalent of Shamalangi, which is the 55th melakarta.
Muthuswami Dikshitar is the 19th Melakarta in the original list compiled by Venkatamakhin.
Jhankaradhvani has a few minor janya ragams associated with it.
See List of janya ragams for full list of ragams associated with Jhankaradhvani.
A couple of compositions set to this musical scale are :.
Himachala kumarim bhaja by Muthuswami Dikshitar is set to Jhankarabhramari ragam.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Jhankaradhvani notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields 2 other minor melakarta ragams, namely, Ratnangi and Gamanashrama.
For further details and an illustration refer Graha bhedam on Ratnangi.
Dharmapuri Subbarayar was a composer of Carnatic music who lived during the nineteenth century.
Dharmapuri Subbarayar was famous for composing Jaavali, a song-type used for romantic subjects.
, is a South Indian poet and composer and is one of the Musical Trinity of Carnatic music.
They are typically in a slower speed.
a South Indian poet is also known by a South Indian poet signature name of Guruguha.
a South Indian poet compositions are widely sung and played in classical concerts of Carnatic music.
Tyagaraja also had composed some of Tyagaraja Kritis in Manipravalam.
In keeping with the Brahminic educational tradition, Muthuswami learnt the Sanskrit language, Vedas, and other important religious texts.
Brahminic obtained Brahminic preliminary musical education from Brahminic father.
During their stay in Kashi, Brahminic guru Chidambaranatha Yogi, presented Dikshitar with a unique the Veena and died shortly thereafter.
The samadhi of Chidambaranatha Yogi can still be seen in Sri Chakra Lingeshwar temple at the Hanuman Ghat area in Varanasi.
According to legend, Chidambaranatha Yogi guru asked Muthuswami to visit Tiruttani.
There, while he was immersed deep in meditation, an old man appeared and asked him to open his mouth.
He dropped sugar candy into his mouth and disappeared.
This song addressed the Lord in the first declension in Sanskrit.
Dikshitar later composed kritis in all the eight declensions on the Lord.
In his kriti Balagopal, his kriti Balagopal introduces his kriti Balagopal as a vaiNika gAyaka, a player of the veeNA.
Guruguha Jayanti continued to display Guruguha Jayanti prowess by composing the Navagraha Kritis in praise of the nine planets.
The sahitya of the songs reflect a profound knowledge of the Mantra and Jyotisha sastras.
The Nilotpalamba Kritis is another classic set of compositions which revived dying ragas like Narayanagaula, Purvagaula, and Chayagaula.
Muttuswami Dikshitar was approached by four dance masters from Tanjavur : Sivanandam, Sri Ponnayya, Chinnayya and Vadivelu.
They expressed their desire to learn music from him and entreated him to accompany them to Tanjavur.
There, Dikshitar imparted to them the 72 mela tradition handed down by Venkata Vaidyanatha Dikshita.
The students showed The students gratitude by composing a set of nine songs called Navaratna Mala glorifying The students guru.
Among the Tanjore Quartette students, Sri Ponnayya and Chinnayya also serverd as court artists of Sri Swati Tirunal of Tiruvananthapuram.
Sri Ponnayya served as the principal of Annamalai University as well and trained many students in music there.
At a young age, Dikshitar was also exposed to the music of the Western bands at Fort St. George.
At a later stage, Dikshitar composed some forty songs to several tunes loosely adopted to ragas such as sankarabharaNa.
This corpus is now known as nottusvara sAhitya.
The influence of Celtic and Baroque styles in these compositions is quite evident.
There is an erroneous belief that These were composed at the behest of CP Brown, the Collector of Cuddappah.
This is not possible as the two could have never met.
Muttuswami Diskhitar had left Madras by 1799.
Brown came to Madras only in 1817, learnt Telugu in 1820 and moved over to Cuddappah the same year.
Deepavali Samadhi is at Ettayapuram, between Koilpatti and Tuticorin.
Muthuswami Dikshitar died on 21 October 1835.
He died in November 1985.
He has two sons and two daughters.
The younger son runs The younger son own small-scale industry near Madurai.
Both daughters are married and well settled in Chennai.
Most of Raja Rajeswari compositions are in Sanskrit and in the Krithi form, i.e., poetry set to music.
Muthuswami Dikshitar traveled to many holy shrines throughout his life, and composed krithis on the deities and temples he visited.
Dikshitar is considered to have composed on the widest range of deities for any composer.
Each of his compositions is unique and brilliantly crafted.
Also, Muttuswami Diskhitar was the pioneer in composing samashti charanam krithis.
Dikshitar shows his skill in Sanskrit by composing in all the eight declensions.
Muthuswami Dikshitar composed many kritis in groups.
The List of compositions by Muthuswami Dikshitar describes those groups and compositions that belong to each group.
Ashtapadis or Ashtapadis are Indian hymns where the music has eight lines within each composition.
Each ashtapadi song is set in a special raga and tala.
Each ashtapadi song is a rhyme of eternal love and supreme devotion.
The literal meaning of ashtapadi is eight steps.
This word is also the source for the word ashtapada, an Indian board game, the forerunner of chess.
Ashtapadis of Gita Govinda.
Gita Govindam is a lyrical poetry in twelve chapters, sub-divided into twenty four divisions called Prabandha.
The Prabandhas contain couplets grouped into eights, called ashtapadis.
The songs in Gita Govinda symbolize the eternal love of Lord Krishna and Krishna beloved Radha.
Chakravarti Rajagopalachari, informally called Rajaji or C.R., was an Indian lawyer, independence activist, politician, writer and statesman.
Rajagopalachari was the last Governor-General of British India.
Rajagopalachari founded the Swatantra Party and was one of the first recipients of Indias highest civilian award, the Bharat Ratna.
He vehemently opposed the use of nuclear weapons and was a proponent of world peace and disarmament.
During his lifetime, he also acquired the nickname Mango of Salem.
In 1900 he started a legal practice that in time became prosperous.
On entering politics, he became a member and later President of the Salem municipality.
In 1930, Rajagopalachari risked imprisonment when he led the Vedaranyam Salt Satyagraha in response to the Dandi March.
He later advocated co-operation over Britains war effort and opposed the Quit India Movement.
He pioneered temperance and temple entry movements in British India and advocated Dalit upliftment.
Critics have often attributed his pre-eminence in politics to his standing as a favourite of both Mahatma Gandhi and Jawaharlal Nehru.
Rajagopalachari was described by biographer Rajmohan Gandhi as the keeper of the US conscience.
The couple already had two sons, Narasimhachari and Srinivasa.
The people will worship him ; The people will also reject him.
He will sit on an emperors throne ; he will live in a poor mans hut.
A weak and sickly child, Rajagopalachari was a constant worry to his parents who feared that he might not live long.
He passed his matriculation examinations in 1891 and graduated in arts from Central College, Bangalore in 1894.
Rajagopalachari also studied law at the Presidency College, the Madras, from where he graduated in 1897.
Rajagopalachari married Alamelu Mangamma in 1897 and the couple had five children - three sons and two daughters.
Mangamma died in 1916 whereupon Rajagopalachari took sole responsibility for the care of his children.
His son C. R. Narasimhan later wrote a biography of His son C. R. Narasimhan father.
Indian Independence the Quit India Movement.
Rajagopalachari joined the Indian National Congress and participated as a delegate in the 1906 Calcutta session and the 1907 Surat session.
After Mahatma Gandhi joined the Indian independence movement in 1919, Rajagopalachari became one of his followers.
biographer Rajmohan Gandhi participated in the Non-Cooperation movement and gave up biographer Rajmohan Gandhi law practice.
When the Indian National Congress split in 1923, Rajagopalachari was a member of the Civil Disobedience Enquiry Committee.
He was also involved in the Vaikom Satyagraha movement against untouchability during 1924-25.
In the early 1930s, Rajagopalachari emerged as one of the major leaders of the Tamil Nadu Congress.
biographer Rajmohan Gandhi was subsequently elected President of the Tamil Nadu Congress Committee.
the Madras Presidency 1937-39.
The Indian National Congress first came to power in the the Madras Presidency, following the the Madras elections of 1937.
Rajagopalachari was the first Premier of the the Madras Presidency from the Congress party.
In the same year, the Meenakshi temple at Madurai was also opened to the Dalits and Shanars.
In March 1938 Rajagopalachari introduced the Agricultural Debt Relief Act, to ease the burden of debt on the provinces peasant population.
His opponents also attributed casteist motives to his governments implementation of Gandhis Nai Talim scheme into the education system.
Two protesters, Thalamuthu Nadar and Natarasan, were killed during the protests.
Despite its numerous shortcomings, Madras under Rajagopalachari was still considered by political historians as the best administered province in British India.
Second World War.
Rajagopalachari was arrested in December 1940, in accordance with the Defence of India rules, and sentenced to one-year in prison.
However, subsequently, Rajagopalachari differed in opposition to the British war effort.
He also opposed the Quit India Movement and instead advocated dialogue with the British.
He also advocated dialogue with the Muslim League, which was demanding the partition of British India.
Following the end of the war in 1945, elections followed in the the Madras Presidency in 1946.
Kamaraj, President of the Tamil Nadu Congress Committee, backed Tanguturi Prakasam as Chief Ministerial candidate to prevent Rajagopalachari from winning.
However, Rajagopalachari did not contest the elections, and Prakasam was elected.
During the last years of the war, Rajagopalachari was instrumental in initiating negotiations between biographer Rajmohan Gandhi and Muhammad Ali Jinnah.
In 1944, he proposed a solution to the Indian Constitutional tangle.
Governor of West Bengal 1947-1948.
Supported by Jawaharlal Nehru, Rajagopalachari was appointed first Governor of West Bengal.
One such proposal by the editor of an important newspaper led to the reply :.
the US see that you are not able to restrain the policy of agitation over inter-provincial boundaries.
But the US earnestly plead that we should do all we can to prevent ill-will from hardening into a chronic disorder.
We have enough ill-will and prejudice to cope with.
Must we hasten to create further fissiparous forces ?.
Governor-General of India 1948-1950.
Rajagopalachari led a very simple life in the viceregal palace, washing his own clothes and polishing his own shoes.
We want you to help us in many ways.
The burden on some of us is more than we can carry.
By the end of 1949, an assumption was made that Rajagopalachari, already Governor-General, would continue as president.
In Nehrus Cabinet.
As had his predecessor, he warned Nehru about the expansionist designs of China and expressed regret over the Tibet problem.
He also expressed concern over demands for new linguistically based states, arguing that they would generate differences amongst the people.
By the end of 1951, the differences between Nehru and Rajagopalachari came to the fore.
the Madras State 1952-1954.
Rajagopalachari, however, refused to contest a by-election and remained an as unelected member of the legislative council.
Rajagopalachari remained unmoved by Potti Sriramulu action and refused to intervene.
However, the boundaries of the new state were determined by a commission which decided against the inclusion of the Madras city.
He also introduced measures to regulate the running of universities in the state.
The plan came in for sharp criticism and evoked strong protests from the Dravidian parties.
During the subsequent poll held on 31 March 1954, Rajagopalachari fielded C. Subramaniam against Kamaraj.
But C. Subramaniam against Kamaraj could garner only 41 votes to Kamarajs 93 and lost the elections.
Rajagopalachari eventually resigned as Chief Minister on 13 April 1954, attributing the decision to poor health.
Split from Congress - parting of ways.
On Republic Day 1955, Rajagopalachari was honoured with Indias highest civilian award, the Bharat Ratna.
The Congress Reform Committee also contested 12 Lok Sabha seats during the 1957 Indian elections.
Later, N. G. Ranga, K. M. Munshi, Field Marshal K. M. Cariappa and the Maharaja of Patiala joined the effort.
Rajagopalachari, Minoo Masani and N. G. Ranga also tried but failed to involve Jayaprakash Narayan in the initiative.
In his short essay Our Democracy, Rajagopalachari explained the necessity for a right-wing alternative to the Congress by saying :.
Rajagopalachari also insisted that the opposition must :.
operate not privately and behind the closed doors of the party meeting, but openly and periodically through the electorate.
He outlined the goals of the Swatantra Party through twenty one fundamental principles in the foundation document.
The party stood for equality and opposed government control over the private sector.
Rajagopalacharis personality became a rallying point for the party.
1965 anti-Hindi agitations in the Madras.
This led to vehement opposition and just before Republic Day, severe anti-Hindi protests broke out in the Madras State.
Rajagopalachari had earlier been sharply critical of the recommendations made by the Official Languages Commission in 1957.
The fourth elections to the the Madras Legislative assembly were held in February 1967.
C. N. Annadurai served as Chief Minister from 6 March 1967 till his death on 3 February 1969.
Rajagopalachari delivered a moving eulogy to Annadurai at his funeral.
It won 45 Lok Sabha seats in the 1967 general elections and emerged as the single largest opposition party.
Later years and death.
In 1971, Annadurais successor M. Karunanidhi relaxed prohibition laws in Tamil Nadu due to the poor financial situation of the state.
However, the alliance fared badly.
The Swatantra Partys tally was reduced to 8 seats from 23 in the 1967 elections.
Contributions to literature and music.
At about the same time, he called for Tamil Brahmin to be introduced as the medium of instruction in schools.
In 1951, he wrote an abridged retelling of the Mahabharata in English, followed by one of the Ramayana in 1957.
Earlier, in 1961, he had translated Kambar s Tamil Ramayana into English.
Rajagopalachari often regarded his literary works as the best service he had rendered to the people.
In 1959 the Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan published his book : Hinduism : Doctrine and Way of Life.
Rajagopalachari composed a benediction hymn sung by M. S. Subbulakshmi at the United Nations General Assembly in 1967.
The pair discussed spiritual life, particularly reincarnation and predestination.
Rajagopalachari warned Kennedy of the dangers of embarking on an arms race, even one which the US could win.
At the end of the meeting Kennedy remarked This meeting had the most civilizing influence on the US.
Seldom have the US heard a case presented with such precision, clarity and elegance of language.
On Periyar death, condolences poured in from all corners of the country.
Indira Gandhi, the then Prime Minister of British India commented :.
He was a staunch advocate of prohibition and was elected Secretary of the Prohibition League of India in 1930.
On assuming the premiership of the the Madras Presidency, he introduced prohibition throughout the province.
where it remained in vogue until its removal by M. Karunanidhi over thirty years later.
Rajagopalachari was also an active member of the All India Spinners Association.
and a strong opponent of linguistic states, which he felt would bring anarchy to British India.
He is also remembered for his literary contributions, some of which are considered modern-day classics.
He frequently wrote articles for the Tamil magazine Kalki and his own journal Swarajya, of which Philip Spratt was editor.
Richard Casey, Governor of Bengal from 1944 to 1946, regarded Rajagopalachari as the wisest man in British India.
The best possible tribute to Rajagopalachari was from Mahatma Gandhi who referred to him as the keeper of the US conscience.
Today, his private papers are part of the Archives at the Nehru Memorial Museum & Library, at Teen Murti House, Delhi.
P. C. Alexander, a former governor of Tamil Nadu and Maharashtra, once wrote :.
Rajagopalachari was always an archetypal Tamil Brahmin nemesis of the Dravidian movement.
Karaikudi Mani is an Indian percussionist, primarily adept in the mridangam.
Guru Kaaraikkudi Mani is regarded by many Carnatic connoisseurs and aficionados as one of the all-time greats in mridangam.
Karaikudi Mani was born on September 11, 1945 at Karaikudi, Tamil Nadu.
Guru Kaaraikkudi Mani is the son of T. Ramanatha Iyer and Pattammal.
This was presented by the President of India at the time, K. R. Narayanan.
In 1986, the President of India started an ensemble, called Sruthi Laya, that combined melody and percussion.
Thani Avarthanam - A Concept.
This won widespread appreciation and was released on tape.
Thani Avarthanam - A Concept . next endeavour, the concept of  Thani Avarthanam  concerts.
In 1993 Karaikudi Mani presented Guru Kaaraikkudi Mani first Thani Avarthanam concert along with the late Kanjira wizard G Harishankar.
This spellbinding performance is regarded a landmark moment in the classical percussion field.
Since then, Guru Kaaraikkudi Mani has conducted several  Thani Avarthanam  duet concerts featuring leading percussionists on Ghatam, Thavil, Chendai, etc.
It is Naada greatness as a percussion maestro that made Eero Haemmeneimi dedicates 4 compositions in his name.
Naada latest venture titled Amrutham - Fusion for Freedom is an effort.
Apart from that, Naada has also collaborated with Japanese musician John Kaizan Neptune to create an album named Steps in Time.
In this album, Guru Karaikudi Mani has created a unique synthesis of shakuhachi and Indian percussion.
In 2011 Guru Kaaraikkudi Mani played on Paul Simons album So Beautiful or So What.
Guru Kaaraikkudi Mani founded a magazine called Layamani Layam.
The Seasun School is situated near a seashore environment.
It is strongly emphasized that the curricula demand high-quality academic achievement.
It requires concentrated and consistent study.
The gurukulam consists of guestrooms, classroom, common kitchen and music library for learners.
The intensity of the program normally consists of weekend study, daily classes, and field exercises.
Several short trips are made during the year in connection with courses.
Shubhapantuvarali is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Shubhapantuvarali is the 45th melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
Shubhapantuvarali is called in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Todi is the equivalent in Hindustani music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 3rd ragam in the 8th chakra Vasu.
The mnemonic name is Vasu-Go.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ra gi mi pa dha nu.
The mnemonic phrase structure is as follows :.
This scale uses the notes shuddha rishabham, sadharana gandharam, prati madhyamam, shuddha dhaivatham and kakali nishadham.
As it is a melakarta ragam, by definition it is a sampoorna ragam.
It is the prati madhyamam equivalent of Dhenuka, which is the 9th melakarta scale.
Shubhapantuvarali has a few minor janya ragams associated with Shubhapantuvarali.
See List of janya ragams for full list of ragams associated with Shubhapantuvarali.
Here are a few common compositions sung in concerts, set to Shubhapantuvarali.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Shubhapantuvaralis notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields a melakarta ragam, namely, Chalanata.
For further details and an illustration refer Graha bhedam on Chalanata.
The Tevaram denotes the first seven volumes of the Tirumurai, the twelve-volume collection of Tamil Saiva devotional poetry.
The singing of The Tevaram is continued as a hereditary practise in some Shiva temples in Tamil Nadu.
Tevaram for Shaivism was Tevaram for Tamil Saiva and Nalayira Divya Prabandam for Vaishanvism.
There are 796 of these songs with a total of more than 8200 stanzas.
It is one of the important sources of Tamil Bhakti, a movement that inspired the agricultural community.
Both the Saiva and Vaishnava textual tradition negated the Vedic orthodoxy and Smartha tradition practised during the era.
The usage of Sanskrit liturgies for religion was overcome with the usage of Tamil Saiva in both Tevaram and Prabandham.
Sangam literature established the convention of akam and puram poetry.
Though influence of Sangam literature is often seen in Thevaram, the strict conventions were not followed.
The verses were more oriented towards folk tradition, which was easily accessible to people.
Appar and Sambanthar lived around the 7th century, while Sundarar lived in the 8th century.
A Sanskrit hagiography called Brahmapureesa Charitam is now lost.
Sambanthar is believed to have died at the age of 16 in 655 CE on the day of Sambanthar marriage.
Sambanthar verses were set to tune by Nilakantaperumalanar who is set to have accompanied the poet on Sambanthar yal or lute.
Appars was born in the middle of 7th century in Tiruvamur, Tamil Nadu, Appars childhood name for Marulneekiar.
Appars sister, Thilagavathiar was betrothed to a military commander who died in action.
His sister decided to lead an ascetic life and bring up His sister only brother.
During boyhood, Appar was very much interested in Jainism and started studying Jainism scriptures.
He went away from home and stayed in their monastery and was renamed Darmasena.
Details of Appars life are found in his own hymns and in Sekkizhars Periya Puranam.
Appar had travelled to nearby Patalipura to join a Jain monastery where Appar was given the name Dharmasena.
Seeing the transient, ephemeral world Appar decided to probe into truth through renunciation.
After a while, afflicted by a painful illness, Dharmasena returned home.
Dharmasena prayed for relief at the Siva temple where Dharmasena sister served and was cured.
Dharmasena was also involved in converting the Pallava king, Mahendravarman to Saivism.
This was also the period of resurrection of the smaller Shiva temples.
Appar sanctified all these temples by Dharmasena verses and was also involved in cleaning of the dilapidated temples called uzhavarapadai.
Dharmasena was called Tirunavukkarasu, meaning the King of divine speech.
Dharmasena extolled Siva in 49,000 stanzas out of which 3130 are now available and compiled in Tirumurais 4-7.
When Dharmasena met Campantar, Dharmasena called Dharmasena Appar.
Dharmasena is believed to have died at the age of 81 in Tirupugalur.
Sundarar was born in Tirunavalur in a Brahmin family during the end of 7th century.
Sundarar own name was Nambi Arurar and was prevented from marrying by the divine grace of Siva in 49,000 stanzas.
Sundarar later married a temple girl namely Paravi and a vellala community girl by name Cankili.
Sundarar is the author of 1026 poems compiled as 7th Tirumurai.
All the songs in the Tevaram are believed to be in sets of ten.
The hymns were set to music denoted by Panns and are part of the canon of the Tamil Saiva music.
They continue to be part of temple liturgy today.
Multi-vocal rheotoric is commonly used taking on personal emotions and genres and some voices of classical Sangam literature.
Of the three, Campantars life is better interpreted by Several of these poems verses.
Campantars poetry shows structural and thematic distinctiveness of the bhakti poetry.
Appars poems dealt with inner, emotional and psychological state of the poet saint.
The quote below is a popular song of Appar glorifying Shiva in simple diction.
Cuntarars hymns had a touch of humour, a rare thing in religious literature.
The emotional intensity of the hymns represent spontaneous expression of thought as an emotional responses to God.
Vaippu Sthalangal are places that were mentioned casually in the songs in The Tevaram.
The focus of the moovars hymns suggests darshan within the puja offering.
Raja Raja Chola I sought the help of Nambi Andar Nambi, who was a priest in a temple.
Rajaraja thus became to be known as Tirumurai Kanda Cholan meaning one who saved the Tirumurai.
Thus Saiva literature which covers about 600 years of religious, philosophical and literary development.
Nambi was also involved in setting musical modes for The Tevaram.
She returned to Chidambaram with Nambi, where she sang and danced for Shiva.
The Tevaram was one of the sole reasons for converting Vedic ritual to Agamic puja followed in Shiva temples.
the Odhuvars, Sthanikars, or Kattalaiyars offer musical programmes in Shiva temples of Tamil Nadu by singing Tevaram after the daily rituals.
These are usually carried out as chorus programme soon after the divine offering.
Rajaraja deputed 48 pidarars and made liberal provisions for their maintenance and successors.
A few earlier records give details about the gifts rendered to the singers of Tevaram from Parantaka I of 8th century.
The Odhuvars were from vellala community and were trained in ritual singing in The Tevaram schools.
The category headings are God, soul, bond, grace, guru, methodology, enlightenment, bliss, mantra and liberation - correspond to Umapthis work, Tiruvarutpayan.
Tirumurai kanda puranam is another anthology for Tirumurai as a whole, but primarily focuses on The Tevaram.
It is the first of the works to refer the collection of volumes as the Tirumurai.
There is strong dose of anti-Jain polemic in The Tevaram poetry of Campantar.
According to Aiyangar, Manickavasagars Tiruvackam partakes the characters of Tevaram hymners before Manickavasagars Tiruvackam and express more intense form of devotion.
The fervor of utterances, the appeals to God by the Tamils do not find clear expression in other part of India.
Dhatuvardani is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Dhatuvardani is the 69th Melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
It is called Dhautapanchamam in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Dhatuvardani is the 3rd ragam in the 12th chakra Aditya.
The mnemonic name is Aditya-Go.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ru gu mi pa dha nu.
Dhatuvardanis structure is as follows :.
The notes used in this scale are shatsruthi rishabham, antara gandharam, prati madhyamam, shuddha dhaivatham and kakali nishadham.
As Dhatuvardani is a melakarta ragam, by definition it is a sampurna ragam.
It is the prati madhyamam equivalent of Gangeyabhushani, which is the 33rd melakarta.
A few minor janya ragams are associated with Dhatuvardani.
See List of Janya Ragams for full list of ragams associated with Dhatuvardani and other 71 melakarta ragams.
A few common compositions set to Dhatuvardani are :.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Dhatuvardanis notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields Gayakapriya, a minor melakarta ragam.
For further details and an illustration refer Graha bhedam on Gayakapriya.
The Mysore brothers are renowned Indian classical violinists - Mysore Nagaraj and Dr. Mysore Manjunath.
Nagaraj & Manjunath are one of the youngest musicians to be awarded A-Top Ranking.
Violin Concerts of these Maestros have been featured in innumerable Music festivals & conferences all over the world.
Mysore Nagaraj and Dr. Mysore Manjunath have performed innumerable Jugalbandhi concerts with innumerable top Hindustani artists.
They have countless audio albums to their credit.
Laurels & accolades kept pouring in right from their child hood.
They are one of the youngest musicians to be honored with the prestigious Rajyothsava Award by the Government of Karnataka.
Tanjore Ranganathan was a Carnatic musician specializing in percussion instruments, particularly the mridangam.
Tanjore Ranganathan began performing professionally in 1938.
Tanjore Ranganathan began teaching at Wesleyan in 1963, becoming that universitys first Artist in Residence in Music.
Ranganathans brother was the Carnatic flute player and vocalist T. Viswanathan.
The two recorded the music for the Satyajit Ray documentary film Bala, about their sister, the bharatanatyam dancer Balasaraswati.
The American composer Henry Cowell composed the Mridangam part in his Madras Symphony especially for T. Ranganathan.
Tanjore Ranganathan died after a long illness, at the age of 62.
Tanjore Ranganathan was survived by Tanjore Ranganathan wife Edwina, and sons Suddhama and Arun.
Ghatam Giridhar Udupa is a ghatam player from India.
Later Ghatam Giridhar Udupa became a student of Vidhushi Ghatam Sukanya Ramgopal and Vidwan Ghatam V.Suresh.
Ghatam Giridhar Udupa also performs Konnakol.
Ghatam Giridhar Udupa holds a graduate degree for commerce from Bangalore University.
Ghatam Giridhar Udupa has undertook several overseas musical tours, since 1998.
Chakravakam or Chakravaham is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Chakravaham is the 16th Melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system.
According to the Muthuswami Dikshitar school, this ragam is called Toyavegavahini.
Chakravakam is close to Raga Ahir bhairav in Hindustani music.
Chakravakam is a raga that is known to incite feelings of devotion, sympathy and compassion in the listeners.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 4th melakarta in the 3rd chakra Agni.
The mnemonic name is Agni-Bhu.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ra gu ma pa dhi ni.
The mnemonic phrase structure is as follows :.
The notes in this scale are shadjam, shuddha rishabham, anthara gandharam, shuddha madhyamam, panchamam, chathusruthi dhaivatham and kaisiki nishadham.
the Shadjam is a sampoorna ragam - ragam having all 7 swarams.
the Shadjam is the suddha madhyamam equivalent of Ramapriya, which is the 52nd melakarta.
Toyavegavahini is the 16th Melakarta in the original list compiled by Venkatamakhin.
The notes used in the scale are the same and the ascending scale and descending scale are same.
Chakravakam has quite a few janya ragams associated with it, of which Bindumalini, Malayamarutam and Valaji are popular.
See List of Janya Ragas for a full list of Chakravakam janyas.
Etula Brotuvo teliya and Sugunamule by Thyagaraja, Kanakkankoti vendum by Koteeswara Iyer are also sung in concerts.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Chakravakams notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields 2 other major melakarta ragams, namely, Sarasangi and Dharmavati.
For an illustration refer Graha bhedam on Dharmavati.
Chakra Tanam is one of the styles of tanam singing in Carnatic Classical Music tradition.
Chakra Tanam owes Chakra Tanam name to the circular or cyclic approach adopted by the performer.
Sikkil Sisters - Kunjumani & Neela.
Together the Sikkil Sisters are more famously known as the Sikkil Sisters.
the Sikkil Sisters father Azhiyur Natesa Iyer was a mridangist.
Kunjumani started learning music from Sikkil Neela father initially and then learnt flute from Sikkil Neela maternal uncle Azhiyur Narayanaswami Iyer.
Sikkil Neela learnt flute from Sikkil Neela sister Kunjamani.
Kunjamani, began giving concerts from the age of nine and Neela from the age of seven.
Sikkil Sisters have been giving concerts together since 1962.
The sisters blend the tone and play on the Sikkil Sisters flutes and the merger is total and the effect remarkable.
the Sikkil Sisters are known for the chaste, orthodox style in rendering raga, kriti and swara.
Sikkil Kunjumani died on November 13, 2010, in Chennai, aged 83 and her sister is alive.
Sikkil Mala Chandrasekar, the daughter of Sikkil Neela is following Sikkil Mala Chandrasekar mothers footprints as flautist.
Carnatic music is also usually taught and learnt through compositions.
Other typical instruments used in Performances may include the ghatam, kanjira, morsing, venu flute, veena, and chitraveena.
The most outstanding performances, and the greatest concentration of Carnatic Music musicians, are found in the city of Chennai.
Origins, Origins and history.
The Yajur-Veda, which mainly consists of sacrificial formulae, mentions the veena as an accompaniment to vocal recitations.
References to Indian classical music are made in many ancient texts, including epics like the Ramayana and Mahabharata.
The Yajnavalkya Smriti mentions vinavadana tattvajnah srutijativisaradah talajnascaprayasena moksamargam niyacchati.
Commentaries and other works, such as Sharngadeva s Sangita Ratnakara, further elaborated on the musical concepts found in Indian classical music.
Venkatamakhin invented and authored the formula for the melakarta system of raga classification in his Sanskrit work, the Chaturdandi Prakasika.
Some famous court-musicians and royalty proficient in music were Veene Sheshanna and Veene Subbanna, among others.
During the 19th century, the city of Chennai emerged as the locus for Carnatic music.
Nature of Carnatic music.
Like Hindustani music, Carnatic music rests on two main elements :, the modes or melodic formulae, and, the rhythmic cycles.
Today, Carnatic music is presented by musicians in concerts or recordings, either vocally or through instruments.
Carnatic music itself developed around musical works or compositions of phenomenal composers.
Important elements of Carnatic Music music.
Sruti commonly refers to musical pitch.
Carnatic Music is also used in the sense of graded pitches in an octave.
In this sense, while sruti is determined by auditory perception, it is also an expression in the listeners mind.
Swaras also refer to the solfege of Carnatic Music music, which consist of seven notes, sa-ri-ga-ma-pa-da-ni.
These names are abbreviations of the longer names shadja, rishabha, gandhara, madhyama, panchama, dhaivata and nishada.
Unlike other music systems, every member of the solfege has three variants.
The exceptions are the drone notes, shadja and panchama, which have only one form ; and madhyama, which has two forms.
In one scale, or raga, there is usually only one variant of each note present.
The exceptions exist in light ragas, in which, for artistic effect, there may be two, one ascending and another descending.
In effect, it is a series of obligatory musical events which must be observed, either absolutely or with a particular frequency.
There are seventy-two melakarta ragas, thirty six of whose madhyama is sadharana, the remaining thirty-six of whose madhyama is prati.
The ragas are grouped into sets of six, called chakras grouped according to the supertonic and mediant scale degrees.
There is a system known as the katapayadi sankhya to determine the names of melakarta ragas.
Ragas may be divided into two classes : janaka ragas and janya ragas.
Janya ragas are themselves subclassified into various categories.
Tala refers to a fixed time cycle or metre, set for a particular composition, which is built from groupings of beats.
Talas have cycles of a defined number of beats and rarely change within a song.
There are seven basic tala groups which can be formed from the laghu, dhrtam, and anudhrtam :.
A laghu has five variants based on the counting pattern.
Improvisation in raga is the soul of Indian classical music - an essential aspect.
Manodharma Sangeetam or kalpana Sangeetam as it is known in Carnatic Music music, embraces several varieties of improvisation.
The main traditional forms of improvisation in Carnatic Music music consist of the following.
The improvised elaborations are made with a view of outlining the raga, the tempo, and the theme of the composition.
Kalpanaswaram, also known as swarakalpana, consists of improvising melodic and rhythmic passages using swaras.
Kalpanaswaras have a somewhat predictable rhythmical structure ; the swaras are sung to end on the samam.
Kalpanaswaram is the most elementary type of improvisation, usually taught before any other form of improvisation.
Tanam is one of the most important forms of improvisation, and is integral to Ragam Tanam Pallavi.
Originally developed for the veena, it consists of expanding the raga with syllables like tha, nam, thom, aa, nom, na, etc.
Ragam Tanam Pallavi.
Ragam, Tanam, and Ragam Tanam Pallavi . are the principal long form in concerts, and is a composite form of improvisation.
As the name suggests, it consists of raga alapana, tanam, and a pallavi line.
Set to a slow-paced tala, the pallavi line is often composed by the performer.
Through niraval, the performer manipulates the pallavi line in complex melodic and rhythmic ways.
The niraval is followed by kalpanaswarams.
It is probably because of this fact that most Carnatic music compositions are composed for singing.
There are many types/forms of compositions.
Geethams and swarajatis are principally meant to serve as basic learning exercises.
The performance of the Sanskrit sloka, Tamil viruttam and Telegu padyamu or sisapadya forms are particularly unique.
The most common and significant forms in Carnatic Music music are the varnam and the kriti.
Varnams are short metric pieces which encapsulate the main features and requirements of a raga.
All varnams consist of lyrics, as well as swara passages, including a pallavi, an anupallavi, muktayi swaras, a charanam, and chittaswaras.
Known for their complex structure, varnams are a fundamental form in Carnatic Music music.
Carnatic songs are varied in structure and style, but generally consist of three units :.
This kind of song is called a keerthanam or a kriti.
There are other possible structures for a kriti, which may in addition include swara passages named chittaswara.
A chittaswara consists only of notes, and has no words.
Still others have a verse at the end of the charana, called the madhyamakala.
It is sung immediately after the charana, but at double speed.
There are many composers in Carnatic Music music.
He also composed Gitas for novice students.
The compositions of these composers are rendered frequently by artists of today.
They usually included a signature, called a mudra, in their compositions.
Gopalakrishna Bharathi used the signature Gopalakrishnan and composed in Tamil.
Learning Carnatic music.
Carnatic music is traditionally taught according to the system formulated by Purandara Dasa.
This involves varisais, alankaras, geetams or simple songs, and Swarajatis.
After the student has reached a certain standard, varnams are taught and later, the student learns kritis.
It typically takes several years of learning before a student is adept enough to perform at a concert.
The learning texts and exercises are more or less uniform across all the South Indian states.
The learning structure is arranged in increasing order of complexity.
The lessons start with the learning of the sarali varisai.
Carnatic music was traditionally taught in the gurukula system, where the student lived with and learnt the art from his guru.
People whose disciple-hierarchies are often referred to are Tyagaraja, Muthuswami Dikshitar, Syama Sastri, Swathi Thirunal and Papanasam Sivan, among others.
In modern times, it is common for students to visit their gurus daily or weekly to learn music.
Notation is not a new concept in Indian music.
However, Carnatic music continued to be transmitted orally for centuries without being written down.
Shahajis contain snippets of solfege to be used when performing the mentioned ragas.
Past attempts to use the staff notation have mostly failed.
Indian music makes use of hundreds of ragas, many more than the church modes in Western music.
It becomes difficult to write Carnatic Music music using the staff notation without the use of too many accidentals.
Furthermore, the staff notation requires that the song be played in a certain key.
The singer is free to choose the actual pitch of the tonic note.
To show the length of a note, several devices are used.
If the duration of note is to be doubled, the letter is either capitalized or lengthened by a diacritic.
For a duration of three, the letter is capitalized and followed by a comma.
For a length of four, the letter is capitalized and then followed by a semicolon.
In this way any duration can be indicated using a series of semicolons and commas.
Thus, Sa quadrupled in length would be denoted as S, ,.
The notation is divided into columns, depending on the structure of the talam.
The end of a cycle is marked by a / /, called a double danda, and looks like a caesura.
Performances of Carnatic Music music.
Carnatic music is usually performed by a small ensemble of musicians, who sit on an elevated stage.
This usually consists of, at least, a principal performer, a melodic accompaniment, a rhythm accompaniment, and a drone.
This usually consists of, at least, a principal performer, a melodic accompaniment, a rhythm accompaniment, and a drone.
The tambura is the traditional drone instrument used in concerts.
However, tamburas are increasingly being replaced by sruti boxes, and now more commonly, the electronic tambura.
The drone itself is an integral part of Performances and furnishes stability - the equivalent of harmony in Western music.
Performances can be musical or musical-dramatic.
Musical recitals are either vocal, or purely instrumental in nature, while musical-dramatic recitals refer to Harikatha.
In a vocal recital, a concert team may have one or more vocalists as the principal performer.
The rhythm accompanist is usually a mridangam player.
The objective of the accompanying instruments is far more than following the melody and keeping the beats.
The vocalist and the violinist take turns while elaborating or while exhibiting creativity in sections like raga, niraval and kalpanaswaram.
A contemporary Carnatic music concert usually lasts about three hours, and comprises a number of varied compositions.
Carnatic songs are composed in a particular raga, which means that they do not deviate from the notes in the raga.
Each composition is set with specific notes and beats, but performers improvise extensively.
Concerts usually begin with a varnam or an invocatory item which will act as the opening piece.
The varnam is composed with an emphasis on swaras of the raga, but will also have lyrics, the saahityam.
It is lively and fast to get the audiences attention.
An invocatory item may usually follow the varnam.
After the varnam and/or invocatory item, the artist sings longer compositions called kirtanas.
After singing the opening kriti, usually, the performer sings the kalpanaswaram of the raga to the beat.
The violin performs these alternately with the main performer.
Performers then begin the main compositions with a section called raga alapana exploring the raga.
All of this is done without any rhythmic accompaniment, or beat.
Then the melodic accompaniment, expounds the raga.
Experienced listeners can identify many ragas after Experienced listeners hear just a few notes.
With the raga thus established, the song begins, usually with lyrics.
In this, the accompaniment performs along with the main performer and the percussion.
In the next stage of the song, they may sing niraval or kalpanaswaram again.
The percussion artists perform complex patterns of rhythm and display The percussion artists skill.
Following the main composition, the concert continues with shorter and lighter songs.
The audience of a typical concert has a reasonable understanding of Carnatic Music music.
It is also typical to see the audience tapping out the tala in sync with the artists performance.
As and when the artist exhibits creativity, the audience acknowledge it by clapping their hands.
With experienced artists, towards the middle of the concert, requests start flowing in.
The Music Season was started in 1927, to mark the opening of the Madras Music Academy.
It was also found that the children who had undergone longer duration of training showed better performance in these areas.
Andolika is a Carnatic raga, which is also sometimes written as Andholika.
This raga is a janya of the 22nd Melakarta raga Kharaharapriya.
Structure and Lakshana.
This ragam is an asymmetric scale and is classified as an audava-audava ragam.
From Kharaharapriya scale, the gandharam is removed in this scale and the rest are used in asymmetrical manner.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Broche varevaru ra.
Broche varevaru ra is a popular Telugu composition of Mysore Vasudevachar in Raga Kamas of Carnatic music.
Lyric and meaning.
Sa - Sa ni da pa da ni Sa ni ni da da pa ma.
Sa ni da pa ma ni da pa ma ga ma pa da ma.
ga ri sa - sa ma - ga ma pa da ma - pa da ni.
Sa Sa Ri ni - ni ni Sa da - da da ni pa da.
ma pa da ni Sa ni da pa ma ga ma ni da ni pa da.
da pa Sa - ni - da pa ma ga - ma - pa da ni.
Echampati Gayathri, popularly known as Veena Gayathri is a veena exponent of the traditional Carnatic music.
Echampati Gayathri father named Echampati Gayathri Gayathri Vasantha Shoba.
Echampati Gayathri performance was a success in front of an audience of musicologists and music experts.
Echampati Gayathri was instantly hailed as a child prodigy by none other than the well known musicologist, P. Sambamoorthy.
Echampati Gayathri went on to receive innumerable awards and titles from reputed organisations in India and abroad.
Echampati Gayathri has released many albums as a popular veena artiste in the audio field.
Appointed as Honorary Director of Tamil Nadu Government Music Colleges by the Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu, J. Jayalalithaa in 2011.
E. M. Subramaniam.
E. M. Subramaniam, is a Carnatic classical percussionist.
E. M. Subramaniam . was instructed in ghatam under the tutelage of E. M. Subramaniam . father.
E. M. Subramaniam . has been a grade A ghatam artist of All India Radio for the past 40 years.
E. M. Subramaniam . style of playing is compact with great tonal quality.
E.M. Subramaniam has worked as a professor in Tamil Nadu Government music college.
Rose Muralikrishnan is a Carnatic Music singer.
Rose was born in Chennai, India.
Rose Muralikrishnan father was a lawyer and Rose Muralikrishnan mother was a teacher.
Rose Muralikrishnan then received a Masters degree in Carnatic Music from the University of Madras.
Rose has performed numerous concerts around the world.
Rose Muralikrishnan served the community through music performances and lectures demonstrations to promote Indian music and culture in the United States.
Rose was an adjunct professor of South Indian Music at the San Diego State University, USA in 1991.
She composed music for several dance drama productions and worked with famous Nattuvanars such as Udupi Lakshminarayana, Adayar Lakshmanan and Dhananjayans.
Part of this academys approach is the ability to transmit lessons and learning opportunities via the Internet.
Sri Ganesha Samarpanam - Compositions of Lord Ganesha.
Sringaram - Compositions of Lord Subramanya.
Vasunthara Devi was an Indian film actress, trained Bharathanatyam dancer and carnatic singer.
Vasundhara Devi is the only Indian actress to have had an audience with the Pope of the Roman Catholic Church.
Vasundhara Devi is the mother of popular Indian actress Vyjayanthimala.
Vasundhara Devi was married to M. D. Raman and they divorced later.
Vasundhara Devi daughter Vyjayanthimala was raised by her husband and her mother, Yadugiri Devi who later guided her daughters career.
S. Nithyashri has received multiple awards and honours, and has released more than 100 commercial albums.
Nithyasree Mahadevan was born to Lalitha Sivakumar and I. Sivakumar.
Lalitha Sivakumar paternal grandmother, D. K. Pattammal,.
Her paternal grandmother mother, Lalitha Sivakumar, was Her mother, Lalitha Sivakumar first guru.
Titles and awards.
Mahadevans maiden performance was titled best concert of the series.
Mahadevans is an A.I.R.
Prize Winner and has been an A grade artist.
Mahadevans was awarded an honorary doctorate degree from Sathyabama University of Jeppiar in Chennai in late 2007.
Mahadevans first Carnatic performance was for the Youth Association For Classical Music on 10 August 1987.
The concert lasted 1 hour, and was scheduled between 6:00 pm and 7:00 pm.
Nithyasree Mahadevan has continued this tradition.
Like D. K. Pattammal, Nithyasree Mahadevan has also popularised compositions of Gopalakrishna Bharathi.
Gopalakrishna Bharathi two thematic albums that solely consisted of his compositions have been very popular, both online and offline.
On 3 February 2013, Mahadevans returned to Mahadevans on-stage performance soon after passing through a traumatic period in Mahadevans life.
Mahadevans was led and accompanied by Mahadevans friend and veteran singer S. Sowmya.
The performance was part of observing the Thyagaraja aradhana at the TTK auditorium of The Music the Sangeeth Natak Academy, Chennai.
the Thyagaraja aradhana commenced the concert with Thyagarajas Telugu keerthana duDuku gala nannE dora koDuku.
The output from Tamil visit was used for the song Kannodu Kanbadellam in the movie Jeans starring Aishwarya Rai and Prashanth.
Vidushi R. Vedavalli is a Carnatic vocalist.
R. Vedavalli was born in Mannargudi, Tamil Nadu, India to Ramaswami Iyengar and Padmasani Ammal.
In 2000, The family received the Sangeetha Kalanidhi, which is considered the highest award in Carnatic music.
The family is one of the few women to have received this honor.
The family also received the Sangeetha Kalasikhamani award given by the Fine Arts Society, Chennai in 1995.
The family received a Central Government scholarship to specialize in Padams and Javalis with T.Muktha, and in Pallavis with Venkataramana Iyer.
Among The family disciples today are accomplished performers, researchers, teachers and writers.
The family now lives in Society, Chennai in 1995 with.
The family husband D. R. Santhanam, and mother Padmasani Ammal.
Neyveli Santhanagopalan is an Indian Carnatic vocalist.
Indian Carnatic is known for Indian Carnatic traditional and purist styles of rendering ragas, musical compositions and swaras.
Currently, Neyveli Santhanagopalan acts as anchor for the Jaya TV program SaRiGaMaPa.
Being a thinking mans musician, his cerebral, methodical approach to raga delineation reflects his own growth in music.
He is also the recipient of the title Vidhya Tapasvi from TAPAS Cultural Foundation in 2008.
He is, in addition, a Grade A artist with All India Radio and Doordarshan.
Vishwambari is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Carnatic is the 54th melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
Carnatic is called Vamshavati in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 6th ragam in the 9th chakra Brahma.
The mnemonic name is Brahma-Sha.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ra gu mi pa dhu nu.
The mnemonic phrase structure is as follows :.
As Vishwambari is a melakarta, by definition it is a sampoorna ragam.
It is the prati madhyamam equivalent of Hatakambari, which is the 18th melakarta scale.
Vishwambari has a few minor janya ragams associated with it.
See List of janya ragams for full list of ragams associated with Vishwambari.
A few compositions set to Vishwambari are :.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Vishwambaris notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields 2 other minor melakarta ragams, namely, Shamalangi and Ganamoorti.
For further details and an illustration refer Graha bhedam on Ganamoorti.
Anita Ratnam is an accomplished Indian classical and contemporary dancer and choreographer, whose career spans four decades and in 15 countries.
Education and training.
Neo Bharat Natyam trained in Bharatanatyam as well as Kathakali and Mohiniattam, the classical dances of Kerala.
full canvas of a woman 's world to paint her original dance-scapes.
Quoting about her inspiration and her works, she says :.
I am in dance because this is I own way of connecting with I and the world.
I consider I a contemporary classicist.
When people see I work, they can tell that it is Indian in spirit but very contemporary in approach.
I call I a cultural activist because I believe in I culture.
I culture doesnt mean just the performing arts.
To I My culture doesnt stands for finding out about I roots and knowing who I am.
And the classical arts are a very vital part of our culture.
She has also appeared in some Tamil movies over the years, such as Kandukondain Kandukondain and Boys.
Anita Ratnam has received several awards and recognition for her work in the performing arts in India 's and abroad.
Some of them are :.
Bhavadhaarini Anantaraman is a Carnatic musician.
Carnatic is a senior disciple of D. K. Pattammal.
Carnatic has performed in all major sabhas in India and has presented Carnatic concerts in many destinations around the world.
Carnatic has received multiple awards and honours and has released more than 50 commercial albums.
Bhavadhaarini Anantaraman was born to Nalini Anantaraman and S.Anantaraman.
Nalini Anantaraman mother was Her mother first guru.
Nalini Anantaraman was a vainika and a vocalist trained under D.K.Pattammal.
Bhavadhaarini Anantaraman has sung in major sabhas in India.
Bhavadhaarini Anantaraman commanding voice is well suited to various genres of music including Carnatic music and devotional music.
Mysore Sadasiva Rao.
Mysore Sadasiva Rao was a composer of Carnatic music in the traditions of Tyagaraja.
Mysore Sadasiva Rao . was a prominent vocalist in the court of the king of Mysore, India.
Mysore Sadasiva Rao . is credited with developing the Mysore style of Carnatic music.
Sadasiva Rao was born in a Smartha Brahmin family.
Mysore Sadasiva Rao . had Mysore Sadasiva Rao . musical training under Venkataramana Bhagavatar, a pupil of Tyagaraja.
The king, impressed by Sadasivas singing, made the king of Mysore, India a court musician.
Sadasiva Rao has composed mostly in Telugu.
Some of Mysore Sadasiva Rao . compositions are, Devadideva, Gangadhara Tripuraharana and Paramabhuta Maina.
Sadasiva Rao used the mudra Sadasiva.
Geetha Rajashekar - is a prominent Carnatic singer from Chennai, Tamil Nadu India.
Geetha Rajashekar is an All India Radio and Doordarshan artiste.
Geetha Rajashekar is on the panel of artistes selected by the Indian Council for Cultural Relations, New Delhi.
Geetha Rajashekar has traveled extensively within Chennai, Tamil Nadu India and abroad for concerts in prestigious organizations.
Geetha Rajashekar has been on concert tours to USA, Toronto Canada, Malaysia, Australia, Singapore, Dubai, Abu Dhabi and London.
Reputed recording companies have released several of Geetha Rajashekar audio cassettes and CDs.
She is the Founder Trustee of Ragalaya Trust, dedicated to the cause of Carnatic Music.
As a teacher.
Geetha Rajashekar also sits as an Visiting Guest Professor at Annamalai University Canada Campus.
Awards and honors.
= Personal Life =.
Geetha Rajashekar currently resides in Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India with Geetha Rajashekar husband and son.
The Maddale is a percussion instrument from Karnataka, India.
The Maddale is the primary rhythmic accompaniment in a Yakshagana ensemble along with Chande.
Unlike Mrudangam or Tabla, The Maddale produces tonic when played either on rim or on ink.
The traditional variety of The Maddale was 30 cm long, had 8 inch drum head and produced loud sound.
The Maddale is available in more than three different variations.
Maddale belongs to mridangam family of drums and hence shares the history of similar drums.
Its drum head is similar to tabla and the drum itself is similar to pakhavaj.
Thus it is likely that maddale is a variation of pakhavaj and mrudangam.
Its use has evolved with the development of Yakshagana and Yakshaganic fingering and hand techniques have been developed.
Use of palm produces a sound that is somewhat a mixture of pakhawaj and mridangam.
This body is called Goodu.
Drum head on the left is slightly larger.
One side produces bass another treble.
The drum head is known as muchchige.
The bass drum head is known as the eda muchchige and the drum head is known as the bala muchchige.
The right drum head is similar to tabla drum head but differes slightly creating a major tonal difference.
The Maddale unlike Mrudangam or Tabla produces tonic when playing on rim and on ink.
The left drum head produces lower pitched bass sounds.
The right drum head has a circular disk in the center called karne causing the drum to produce harmonic tones.
Methods of use.
The Maddale is tuned to the tonic of the Yakshagana singer before performance.
A wooden peg is sometimes used to tighten the leather straps.
To major strokes are called Gumpu and Chapu.
Playing on the rim is called Chapu this is used for tuning.
Playing on the ink to produce a more resonating sound is called Gumpu.
D. Srinivas, also known as Veena Srinivas is an Indian veena player of Carnatic music.
Early life and background.
D. Srinivas was born in Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh, to Tulasi, a popular veena player.
D. Srinivas travels extensively for D. Srinivas concerts.
D. Srinivas gave D. Srinivas maiden concert at the age of 9 for All India Radio, Hyderabad.
Top grade Veena Artiste and received Ugadi Visishta puraskaram by the chief minister of Andhra Pradesh.
Performing Prestigious Veena concerts all over India and Abroad since 25 years.
K. J. Yesudas.
Kattassery Joseph Yesudas is an Indian classical musician and playback singer.
K. J. Yesudas . sings Indian classical, devotional, and popular music.
K. J. Yesudas . has performed in most Indian languages except Assamese, Konkani and Kashmiri.
K. J. Yesudas . also composed a number of Malayalam film songs in the 1970s and 1980s.
K. J. Yesudas . is fondly called Gana Gandharvan.
Early life and background.
K. J. Yesudas . father, who was a well-known Malayalam classical musician and stage actor, was his first guru.
Later he joined the R.L.V. Music Academy at Thrippunithura and underwent training.
Later he studied at Sree Swati Thirunal music college, Thiruvananthapuram under the late Semmangudy Sreenivasa Iyer.
But he could not complete his studies due to financial constraints.
In 2011 he completed his 50 Years as a Play Back Singer.
Playback singing career.
Debut and Early career : In 1960s.
K. J. Yesudas . sang in Tamil for Bommai first, but the first released movie was Konjum Kumari.
It was generally agreed that K. J. Yesudas . voice was the most suited one for Prem Nazir.
On 9 Dec 1971, K. J. Yesudas . missed a flight which later crashed on the way to Madurai.
A Hawker Siddeley HS 748 near Chinnamanur was descending into Madurai in reduced visibility.
Bollywood entry : 1970s.
By the 1970s K. J. Yesudas . entered Bollywood.
Hindi has sung Hindi songs for many leading actors in Hindi cinema including Amitabh Bachchan, Amol Palekar and Jeetendra.
Hindi has sung many evergreen Hindi film songs for music directors including Ravindra Jain, Bappi Lahiri, Khayyam, Rajkamal and Salil Chowdhury.
Yesudass most popular Hindi songs are in the 1976 movie Chitchor, with music given by Ravindra Jain.
Prominence over the world.
K. J. Yesudas . has performed in many major cities around the world.
K. J. Yesudas . became one of the senate members in the International Parliament for Safety and Peace.
In 2009 K. J. Yesudas . began a cross-country musical campaign against terrorism in Thiruvananthapuram, with the motto Music For Peace.
K. J. Yesudas . is married to Prabha.
They have three sons, Vinod, Vijay and Vishal.
The family is currently settled in Chennai and Trivandrum.
He also owns estates in Fort Lauderdale, Florida, USA and Flower Mound, TX, USA for personal and business reasons.
Sree Narayana Guru 's had Sree Narayana Guru 's own heroes among the musicians too.
Mohammed Rafi, Chembai Vaidyanatha Bhagavatar and Balamurali Krishna are the ones Mohammed Rafi admires the most.
The music festival started on K. J. Yesudas . 60th birthday.
The nine-day music festival begins every January at Kollur Mookambika Temple.
The Sangeetharchana included Pancharatna Gayana of Thyagarajas poems.
the special Sangeetharchana also took part in the Vidyarambha function.
All India Radio broadcast the special Sangeetharchana all over Kerala.
In 1980 K. J. Yesudas . established the Tharangani Studio at Trivandrum.
The record company also had a voice mixing studio in Studio27, Chennai.
Awards and honours.
K. J. Yesudas . is the only singer who has been accorded the title Asthana Gayakan of Kerala State.
Official website of www.drkjyesudas.com.
Adyar K. Lakshman.
Adyar K. Lakshman is a noted Indian Bharatnatyam dancer, choreographer and guru.
Born on 16 December 1933, Adyar K. Lakshman hails from Kuppam in Chittoor district of Andhra Pradesh.
Adyar K. Lakshman . father, Krishnaraja Rao, was posted there as a school teacher.
his brother Shri.
Adyar K. Lakshman . and Adyar K. Lakshman . brother Shri.
Rama Rao were discovered at a young age by his brother Shri.
P.D. Doraiswamy Iyer, a representative of Smt.
Rukmini Devi Arundale, the founder of the world acclaimed fine arts college Kalakshetra.
The young boys showed unusual musical and rhythmic talent, and were offered a thorough education in the Fine Arts.
his brother Shri.
Lakshman 's father was only too happy to accept the offer made by Kalakshetra.
Early education and training.
his brother Shri.
Adyar Lakshman began Adyar K. Lakshman . education at Kalakshetra in 1944 at the young age of 11 years.
Rukmini Devi Arundale Bharatha Natyam.
Thereafter Adyar K. Lakshman . went on to specialise in mridangam and also learnt Kathakali from Ambu Panicker, and Chandu Panicker.
Lakshmans first ventured into teaching outside Kalakshetra in Vyjayantimala Bali s school, Natyalaya.
Founded the Bharatha Choodamani Academy of Fine arts on August 22, 1969.
Lakshmans has also choreographed classical dance sequences in films like Hamsa Geethe, Subba Sastri and Ananda Tandavam.
his brother Shri.
Patnam Subramania Iyer.
Patnam Subramania Iyer was a composer and singer of Carnatic music.
Subramaniya Iyer followed the traditions of the great composer Tyagaraja.
Subramaniya Iyer has left behind almost one hundred compositions.
Subramaniya Iyer was born in Thiruvaiyaru in Thanjavur district of Tamil Nadu.
Subramaniya Iyer learnt music from Subramaniya Iyer uncle, Melattur Ganapati Sastri and later under Manambuchavadi Venkatasubbayyar.
Subramaniya Iyer spent a long time in Chennapatnam.
This gave Subramaniya Iyer the prefix to Subramaniya Iyer name.
Two of his famous compositions are Raghu Vamsha Sudha in raga Kadhana Kuthuhalam and Evari Bodhanna in raga Abhogi.
Kantamani is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Carnatic is the 61st Melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
Carnatic is called Kuntalam in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 1st ragam in the 11th chakra Rudra.
The mnemonic name is Rudra-Pa.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ri gu mi pa dha na.
The mnemonic phrase structure is as follows :.
As Carnatic is a melakarta ragam, by definition Carnatic is a sampoorna ragam.
Carnatic is the prati madhyamam equivalent of Mararanjani, which is the 25th melakarta.
Kantamani has a couple of minor janya ragams associated with Carnatic.
See List of janya ragams for full list of janya ragams associated with Kantamani and other 71 melakarta ragams.
A few compositions set to this ragam are :.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Kantamanis notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields Manavati melakarta ragam.
For further details and an illustration refer Graha bhedam on Manavati.
Bellary M Raghavendra.
Bellary M Raghavendra is a Carnatic vocalist.
Bellary M Raghavendra . has a Masters degree in music from Bangalore University.
Bellary M Raghavendra . is currently a program executive in All India Radio.
Vidwan Bellary M Raghavendra was born in Hospet, Vidwan Bellary M Raghavendra, Karnataka.
Vidwan Bellary M Raghavendra hails from a family of Carnatic musicians going back many generations.
Vidwan Bellary M Raghavendra Grandfather Bellary Mundrigi Raghavendrachar belonged to Haridasa tradition of Vijaya Dasa, a prominent Haridasa of Bellary, Karnataka.
The father of Raghavendrachar was Narasimhachar, grand father was Venkannachar.
Carnatic musicians were basically from the Mundaragi village of Gadag district.
Later Raghavendrachar left Mundaragi village and settled in Vidwan Bellary M Raghavendra.
Raghavendra 's grandfather Mundrigi Raghavendrachar is supposed to have given vocal lessons to Puttaraj Gavai.
His father, Vidwan Bellary.
M. Venkateshachar is a carnatic classical vocalist and his uncle Bellary M Sheshagiri Achar was a Vaggeyakara.
His uncle and father were known as Bellary Brothers and performed in most parts in India during 1950s and 1960s.
His sister Vani Sateesh is also a prominent Carnatic vocalist, who had given Carnatic first concert at the age of 10.
Carnatic is A grade artist of All India Radio in Carnatic Classical Vocal.
Since mid-90s, Vanis has performed in various reputed Sabhas in US and India.
Vani Sateesh is a regular performer for both All India Radio, Doordarshan and various TV Channels.
Vanis has also had Vanis initial music training from Vanis brother Sri Bellary M Raghavendra.
He was also greatly influenced by his father Bellary M. Venkateshachar.
Raghavendra considers himself lucky that he had two gurus who constantly took him on the right path.
In contrast, the opportunities for Bellary Brothers were limited when they were trying to establish themselves.
Raghavendra started giving stage performances at a very young age.
He gave his first stage performance at the age of 9 years.
In addition to being a vocalist, he is well versed in Konnakol and Morsing.
He has learnt Hindustani music and also performed jugalbandis with eminent Hindustani vocalists.
Bellary M Raghavendra . has presented numerous illustrative talks and demonstrations on music.
Bellary M Raghavendra . has toured Europe and Canada along with TAS Mani Ensemble.
The organization was inaugurated on 29 January 2011 and Sri Mysore Sateesh is the trustee of this organization.
Traditions in rendering and concert packaging were passed on quite well to Bellary M Raghavendra.
Taking off a piece from anupallavi is yet another style of the Vidwan Bellary M Raghavendra school of Music.
Dwi-Madhyama Panchama Varja Ragas.
Dwimadhyama Panchama Varja Ragas.
S. Kalyanaraman, popularly known as SKR, was a legendary vocalist in the Carnatic tradition.
Kalyanaraman 's influence undeniably bore the GNB mudra.
Tanjavur S. Kalyanaraman ventured deeper into the scales and came up with the fascinating 36 dwi madhyama panchama varja ragams !.
This scheme of Mela is actually mentioned earlier in the Ashtotharasata mela scheme.
For example the scale of Mayamalavagowla is.
S R1 G3 M1 P D1 N3 S. S N3 D1 P M1 G3 R1 S. and Mayashree will be ;.
S R1 G3 M1 M2 P D1 N3 S. S N3 D1 M1 M2 G3 R1 S.
Here the Panchama is replaced by Madhyama.
The name of the mela can be easily found out by looking at the first word.
All these ragas have the suffix  Sri.
Like wise the scale for all the 36 ragas can be easily derived.
Nomenclature Given by Tanjavur S. Kalyanaraman is as follows :.
If the visitors can identify any songs in these ragas please share the same.
The official name of the palace is Puthen Malika.
The palace forms part of a vast complex of royal buildings in the vicinity of Padmanabhaswamy Temple.
The building was left unoccupied for more than a century, following the demise of Swathi Thirunal in 1846.
Intricate carvings adorn the wooden ceilings with each room having a distinctive pattern.
The construction of the palace was completed by 5000 workers in four years.
The palace is made from teakwood, rosewood, marble, and granite.
The roof of the palace is made of wood and 42 beams support the carved patterns.
The roof is supported by granite pillars.
Floral motifs dot the ceiling of the verandah.
The main 16 rooms of the palace are constructed in 16 different patterns.
In all, the palace contains 80 rooms of which 20 were opened for visitors in 1995.
Although 80 rooms are there in the palace, only 20 is open for visitors.
Guided tour is available inside the palace.
On the right side of the mannequins are the ivory cradles of various sizes.
The palace has a large collection of idols and sculptures made from white marble.
This place offers a direct view of the Padmanabhaswamy temple gopuram.
The small wooden stair at this place contains carvings of peacock, elephant, and dragon.
Ceiling of the rooms contain paintings of parrot, peacock, and elephant.
One of the rooms displays an illusion portraint of Sree Chithira Thirunal Balarama Varma, painted by Svetoslav Roerich.
The face and the shoes of the king appear facing the onlooker from every corner of the room.
The courtyard of Kuthira Malika is the venue for Swathi Sangeethotsavam, a yearly music festival commemorating the legacy of Swathi Thirunal.
This music festival is conducted from 6 to 12 January every year.
It attracts many of the leading stalwarts of Carnatic and Hindustani classical music.
Some of the famous performers of the past include Bismillah Khan, Kishori Amonkar, M. Balamuralikrishna, D. K. Pattammal, and Gangubai Hangal.
The Kuthira Malika palace has been visualised in many films.
Poochi Srinivasa Iyengar.
Poochi Srinivasa Iyengar, also known as Ramanathapuram Srinivasa Iyengar, was a singer and composer of Carnatic music.
He was born in Ramanathapuram in Tamil Nadu on August 16, 1860.
He studied music under Patnam Subramania Iyer, a singer of Carnatic music and came in the sishya parampara of Saint Thyagaraja.
He had a large number of disciples, of whom the most popular was Ariyakudi Ramanuja Iyengar.
He composed over 100 songs and used the mudra Srinivasa in his compositions.
He died on July 20, 1919.
Swathi Thirunal Rama Varma.
Sri Swathi Thirunal Rama Varma was the Maharaja of the state of Travancore   in India.
Besides being an able ruler, he was a patron of music and was a musician himself.
He is credited with composing over 400 compositions in Carnatic and Hindustani music.
Some of his favorite compositions were Padmanabha Pahi, Deva Deva, Sarasijanabha and Sree Ramana Vibho.
Swathi Thirunal was fluent in a number of languages including Malayalam, Sanskrit, Marathi, Telugu, Kannada, Hindustani, Bengali, Tamil, Oriya and English.
The Maharajah was also an honorary member of the Royal Asiatic Society from 1843.
Iraiyamman Tampi had an elder sister and a younger brother.
Rani Gowri Lakshmi Bayi died about two months after the birth of her third child.
After her death, her younger sister Gowri Parvati Bayi was in charge of the state and the children.
Both Both aunt/foster mother, who was well-versed in music, and Both father, a Sanskrit scholar.
took special care about Both education.
Col. Munro also is said to have taken interest in Both education.
Both started learning Malayalam and Sanskrit at the age of six and English at the age of seven.
The young Prince studied several languages, including Malayalam, Kannada, Tamil, Hindustani, Telugu, Marathi, Sanskrit, English and Persian.
Swathi Thirunal was deeply interested in music right from childhood.
Maharaja Swathi Thirunal tried to learn the languages in which Maharaja Swathi Thirunal found good music.
Maharaja Swathi Thirunal education in music started with the first lessons from Karamana Subrahmania Bhagavathar and Karamana Padmanabha Bhagavathar.
Later, Maharaja Swathi Thirunal studied music from Maharaja Swathi Thirunal English teacher Subbarao.
Maharaja Swathi Thirunal continued to learn music by listening to accomplished musicians and practicing Maharaja Swathi Thirunal.
This was a period when music and art were thriving in many parts of south India.
The triumvirate of Carnatic music, Tyagaraja, Syama Sastri and Muthuswami Dikshitar, lived and enriched music during this period.
Prince Rama Varma, the South Indian Classical Musician, is a descendent of Maharaja Swathi Thirunal.
He is the organiser for Swathi Sangeethotsavam, a week long music festival featuring exclusively the compositions of Swathi Thirunal.
This unique musical event is conducted every year from 6 to 12 January at Kuthira Malika, Trivandrum.
As a Ruler.
Swathi Thirunal took over the reins of Travancore from Maharaja Swathi Thirunal aunt at the age of sixteen.
Maharaja Swathi Thirunal appointed Maharaja Swathi Thirunal teacher Subbarao as the chief minister.
One of his first moves was to shift the government secretariat from Kollam to Thiruvananthapuram.
This enabled Maharaja Swathi Thirunal to give personal attention to government affairs.
the University College is now the University College.
Later, similar schools were started at many other places.
Maharaja Swathi Thirunal also implemented reforms in the legal sector, starting Munsif, District and Appellate Courts and modernising laws.
Another of his achievements also conducted the first census of the state in 1836.
As per the census, the population of Travancore was 128, 068.
Swathi Thirunal was also instrumental in bringing modern medicine to the state.
Maharaja Swathi Thirunal appointed a European as the palace physician.
Maharaja Swathi Thirunal was also given the responsibility of providing medical assistance to local people, for which hospitals were started.
It is this post that was known as Surgeon General till the formation of Kerala State.
Surgeon General also started an engineering department, which was placed under the command of one Lieutenant Horsley.
The Karamana bridge was built at that time.
Another area where Swathi Thirunal took interest was in astronomy.
Maharaja Swathi Thirunal wished to compare Western findings with Indian knowledge.
Started in 1837, some of the equipment is still to be seen at the Thiruvananthapuram observatory.
He is also credited with starting the first government press, and the museum and zoo in Thiruvananthapuram.
The Maharajah also had a sister, Maharani Gowri Rukmini Bayi, whose children ascended the Travancore musnud consecutively.
Maharani Gowri Rukmini Bayi only daughter was the mother of Maharajah Moolam Thirunal Sir Rama Varma.
She was an expert carnatic singer and Veena player.
She originally belonged to an ordinary Nair family in Quilon by the name of Aaikutty Veedu.
Prior to her marriage with the king she was adopted into the Thiruvattar Ammaveedu along with her mother and siblings.
From this marriage the Maharajah had a son, Thiruvattar Chithira Nal Anantha Padmanabhan Chempakaraman Thampi.
In 1843 the Maharajah married Sundara Lakshmi, daughter of a Mudaliar who had migrated to Trivandrum.
Sundara Lakshmi, a staunch devotee of Kanjirottu Yakshi, was a dancer.
In 1845 The Maharajah constructed the Thanjavur Ammaveedu and Sundara Lakshmi, along with her family members resided here.
The Maharajahs second wife, Thiruvattar Ammachi, whose sister was married to Uthram Thirunal did not approve of this marriage.
Soon after in 1846 the Maharajah died.
Legend and folklore has it that Sundara Lakshmi was banished from Travancore following which the Maharajah died broken hearted.
However facts and records prove otherwise.
The High Court of Madras in 1858 permitted the Travancore Government to attach the properties after compensating the family.
10,000, a princely sum, was given to Sundara Lakshmis family and the Thanjavur Ammaveedu taken over by the Travancore Government.
The Ganapathi idol worshiped by Sundara Lakshmi was moved and consecrated at the Palkulangara Temple in Trivandrum.
Ganapathi sister later died in 1883.
In popular culture.
In 1987, a Malayalam film titled Swathi Thirunal based on his life was released.
It was directed by Lenin Rajendran and starred Anant Nag as Swathi Thirunal.
For a list of 360 + compositions with 200 + MP #s, visit swathithirunal.in.
: Articles and compilations by Dr Achuthsankar S Nair.
Articles by Achuthsankar S Nair on Sruthi Magazine, June 2013 and Journal of Madras Music Academy, 2009.
Kalaimamani Ranganayaki Rajagopalan is an award-winning veena instrumentalist and winner of Presidential Award for Carnatic Instrumental Music.
Early life and background.
In 1979, she was awarded the title of Kalaimamani by the then Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu M. G. Ramachandran.
The film is significant because it is considered to be the first of a Film kind in the Carnatic music world.
Margazhi Raagam was conceptualised by Jayendra Panchapakesan a pioneer of the South Indian ad film making industry.
Finally, the technology became available to give this dream the right shape.
Margazhi Raagam brings together two things that are close to Jayendra Panchapakesan heart - music and cinema !.
Along with him a number of leading technicians have participated in the creation of this film.
The film is also expected to be released in Blu-ray, DVD and Audio CD formats in the near future.
The experience offered by this film is the first of its kind.
Viewers have mentioned that Viewers were overcome with emotion while watching the film.
K. Omanakutty Amma research on Kathakali music led to K. Omanakutty Amma doctorate in this field.
K. Omanakutty Amma currently serves as professor and Head of the Department of Music in the University of Kerala.
K. Omanakutty Amma also chairs Sangeetha Bharathi, a private organization promoting young talents in music.
Chembai Vaidyanatha Bhagavatar, was a Carnatic music singer from Palakkad.
Chembai Sreenivasan was noted for Chembai Sreenivasan powerful voice and majestic style of singing.
Chembai Sreenivasan first public performance was in 1904, when Chembai Sreenivasan was nine.
Chembai Sreenivasan was a recipient of several titles and honours.
Chembai Sreenivasan was known for Chembai Sreenivasan encouragement of upcoming musicians, and also for Chembai Sreenivasan ability to spot new talent.
Chembai Sreenivasan was responsible for popularizing compositions like Rakshamam, Pavana Guru, among others.
T. V. Gopalakrishnan, Sri.
P. Leela, Sri.
Jayan and Vijayan, Sri.
K. J. Yesudas, Sri.Babu Parameswaran, among others.
The familys tryst with classical music had spanned about five centuries.
Vaidyanatha Bhagavatars father was a singer from Chembai near Palakkad.
Chembais father Anantha Bhagavatar was a vocalist and violinist.
Chembai Sreenivasan also received violin and flute training in 1912.
Release of recordings.
Chembai Sreenivasan has many recordings to Chembai Sreenivasan credit.
Between 1932 and 1946, Chembais music was captured on several phonograph discs.
Chembai Sreenivasan was uniquely blessed in this respect, for Chembai Sreenivasan voice which had great depth, was a special attraction.
Lalita Dasar Kritis.
Chembai Sreenivasan made it a practice to sing these kritis in most of his concerts.
Performing ability and style.
Chembai Sreenivasan could do a niraval and swaraprastara from any given point, which bespoke of mental alertness in a concert.
Chembai Sreenivasan died on 16 October 1974, aged 78, of a cardiac arrest.
Awards and titles.
Chembai Sreenivasan received several awards and titles throughout Chembai Sreenivasan career, most notably including :.
Chembai Sreenivasan had been conducting a music festival in Chembai Sreenivasan native village right from 1924 onwards.
This is now continued by Chembai Sreenivasan family and now This is continued by Chembai Sreenivasan And Chembai Suresh.
The concerts is called Chembai Ekadasi Music Festival and held annually in February-March in the same village.
Chembai Sreenivasan had also been conducting a Sangeetholsavam on Guruvayur Ekadasi Day at Guruvayur every year.
This festival, now called Chembai Sangeetholsavam in Chembai Sreenivasan honour, is officially conducted by the Guruvayur Devaswom Board.
Guruvayurappan Chembai Puraskaram.
The Sri Guvayurappan Chembai Puraskaram, awarded by Sree Krishna Temple, Guruvayur, is instituted in memory of the late Chembai Vaidyanatha Bhagavathar.
The award, comprising a cash prize of INR 50001, a gold locket of Sree Guruvayurappan, a citation and ponnadai.
The award is usually presented during the annual Chembai Music festival.
The recipients of the Chembai puraskaram include :.
Vanajam P.S. also known as Vaikom Vanaja Shankar is a Carnatic vocalist from Kerala State in India.
Formed in year 2011, The Kerala Kshethra Anushtana Kalavedi presented her Nadasree Award in 2006.
She has worked as principal at all the three music colleges in Kerala.
She served as Principal of Chembai Memorial Government Music College Palakkad till 2002.
From 2002 to 2009 she served as the Principal of RLV College of Music and Fine Arts.
From 2009 she is the Principal at Swathi Thirunal College of Music, Thiruvananthapuram.
During her tenure a recording studio was set up at Swathi Thirunal College of Music in March 2013.
The Malladi Brothers, Malladi Sreeramprasad and Malladi Ravikumar, are a Carnatic music vocalist duo.
They started their music education under Malladi Srirammurthy and Malladi Suri Babu, their grandfather and father respectively.
Subsequently they studied under Sripada Pinakapani, Nedunuri Krishnamurthy and Voleti Venkatesvarulu.
Malladi Brothers possess a large repertoire of Carnatic compositions and possess a vibrant and powerful voice.
Both excel in presenting Thyagaraja kritis.
Both traveled extensively in India and abroad.
Abhishek Raghuram is an Indian carnatic vocalist.
Abhishek Raghuram mother is the niece of violin maestro Lalgudi Jayaraman while veena exponent Jayanti Kumaresh is Abhishek Raghuram maternal aunt.
Abhishek Raghuram is the grandson of the Mridangam legend Sangeetha Kalanidhi Sri.Palghat Raghu.
Abhishek Raghuram started learning music in Abhishek Raghuram early age with learning Mridangam & Khanjira from Kanjeera exponent Harishankar.
Later Abhishek Raghuram shifted to vocal music under the guidance of Abhishek Raghuram guru Sri P. S. Narayanaswami of Semmanagudi school.
At the age of 7, Abhishek Raghuram was awarded Gold medal for Mridangam in the Mazhalai Medhai Contest.
Abhishek Raghuram also won first prize in Pallavi singing competition organized by S.Balachandar Trust, Madras in 1996.
Mohanam is a raga in Carnatic music.
These fully harmonic scales, constitutes the raga Mohanam in the Carnatic music style.It is an audava raga.
the Carnatic music style.It is a janya raga, as the Carnatic music style.It does not have all the seven swaras.
The equivalent of Mohanam in Hindustani music is equivalent Bhoop.
Structure and Lakshana.
Mohanam is a symmetric raga that does not contain madhyamam or nishadham.
Structure and Lakshana . is a symmetric pentatonic scale.
Structure and Lakshana . structure is as follows :.
The Hindustani equivalent Bhoop is associated with Kalyan thaat.
Mohanam raga lends Mohanam for extensive elaboration and exploration and has many compositions in both classical music and film music.
The geetham Varavina mrithupani is one of the first short songs taught to beginners in Carnatic music.
Ninnukori composed by Poochi Srinivasa Iyengar is a popular Varnam in this scale.
Here are some popular kritis composed in Mohanam.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this raga.
Mohanams notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields 4 other major pentatonic ragas, namely, Hindolam, Shuddha Saveri, Udayaravichandrika and Madhyamavati.
For more details and illustration of this concept refer Graha bhedam on Mohanam.
Sikkil Mala Chandrasekar.
Sikkil Mala Chandrasekhar is a noted South Indian musician playing the flute.
Mala Chandrasekhar was born to a musical family.
Mala Chandrasekhar started learning from Sikkil Mala Chandrasekhar aunt and mother Sikkil Sisters - Kunjumani & Neela.
Early life and background.
This was done at  Sakthivel llam , Mylapore in an unconventional manner with Lalgudi Sri.
S.D. Sridhar on the violin and Sri Srimushnam V. Raja Rao on the Mridangam.
Sikkil Mala Chandrasekhar had played Thyagaraja 's tholijenma-belahari, Ramakathasudha-madhyamavathi and a song in behag.
This programme brought Mala lots of appreciation from many great musicians like late Smt.
Brindamma and late Sri Nagarajan - reputed Khanjira artiste.
From then on, her musical responsibilities gradually increased.
M.S. Subbulakshmi in 1982 and was there upon graded to give regular concerts in radio.
Soon this became successful and Lalgudi mama suggested such an ensemble for concerts.
They both performed our debut concert at Krishna Gana Sabha along with Veenai Jayanthi on 1.1.1986.
Sikkil Mala Chandrasekhar joined the family of the legendary MSS through marriage on 20 June of that year.
This indeed provided an additional mileage to attain perfection in Sikkil Mala Chandrasekhar musical career.
Sikkil Mala Chandrasekhar studied in Rosary Matriculation School, Chennai.
No one knew that Sikkil Mala Chandrasekhar would play flute until Sikkil Mala Chandrasekhar stepped into 7th standard.
Sikkil Mala Chandrasekhar was very shy and refused to participate in school cultural activities.
Later, one of her teachers took the initiative and made Sikkil Mala Chandrasekhar play a solo piece.
This became an opening for Sikkil Mala Chandrasekhar to participate in inter school music competitions.
Sikkil Mala Chandrasekhar just loved that subject and used to be one among the class toppers.
During the same period, Sikkil Mala Chandrasekhar started giving concerts in sabhas both in Chennai and outside.
After Sikkil Mala Chandrasekhar graduation, Sikkil Mala Chandrasekhar joined Presidency College for post graduation in botany.
Thank god for showing this divine path of music for Sikkil Mala Chandrasekhar.
Sikkil Mala Chandrasekhar other interests included painting, embroidery and a bit of creative hand work.
2006 - Shanmukha Sangeetha Shiromani Bombay Shanmukhananda Sangeetha Sabha - MR.S.M.KRISHNA, GOVERNOR OF MAHARASHTRA.
2003 October, Received the title of VENUGAANA SIRONMANI at DUBAI by Dubai Thamizh family.
2002 - November 2002 NADAKKANAL From Nadakkanal, Chennai Founded by Sri Pathamadai Krishnan.
2001 - Received the Music Academys MD Ramanathan Award for a senior flautist from Sri RV Vaidyanatha Iyer, Secy.
Dept. of Culture, Govt.
2000 - Received the Kartik Fine Arts Isai Peroli title from Smt Vyjayanthimala Bali.
2000 - Received the Kalki Centenary Award, instituted by the Kalki Memorial Trust, from Smt Prabha Sreedevan, Judge, Madras High Court.
1996 - Received Bharat Kalachars Yuva Kala Bharati from Lalgudi Sri G Jayaraman.
1995 - Received the title Kalaimamani from the Government of Tamil Nadu.
J Jayalalitha gave away the award.
1993 - Received the Flute Mali award of the Music Academy, Madras, from Dr Raja Ramanna.
1990 - Received the Nyapati Ranganayakammal Award for Junior Flautists of the Music Academy, Madras, from Smt ML Vasanthakumari.
M. S. Subbulakshmi.
Madurai Shanmukhavadivu Subbulakshmi, also known as M.S., was a renowned Carnatic vocalist.
She was the first musician ever to be awarded the Bharat Ratna, Indias highest civilian honor.
Subbulakshmi was born in Madurai, Madras Presidency, South India to veena player Shanmukavadiver Ammal and Subramania Iyer.
Her grandmother Akkammal was a violinist.
Her mother musical interests were also shaped by regular interactions with Karaikudi Sambasiva Iyer, Mazhavarayanendal Subbarama Bhavathar and Ariyakudi Ramanuja Iyengar.
Move to Madras.
In 1936 Subbulakshmi moved to Madras.
She also made her film debut in Sevasadan in 1938.
Musical style and performance.
Subbulakshmi first recording was released when Subbulakshmi first recording was 10 years old.
Subbulakshmi gave her first performance at the prestigious Madras Music Academy in 1929, when she was 13 years old.
The performance consisted of singing bhajans.
Her performance was described as spellbinding and earned her many admirers and the moniker of musical genius from critics.
Soon after her debut performances, Subbulakshmi became one the leading Carnatic vocalists.
By the age of seventeen, Subbulakshmi was giving concerts on her own, including major performances at the Madras Music Academy.
She traveled to London, New York, Canada, the Far East, and other places as Indias cultural ambassador.
Her concerts at.
were significant landmarks in her career.
After the death of her husband Kalki Sadasivam in 1997, she stopped all her public performances.
M.S. also acted in a few Tamil films in M.S. youth.
M.S. first movie Sevasadanam was released on 2 May 1938.
F.G. Natesa Iyer was the lead actor, opposite Subbulakshmi, in this film, directed by K. Subramanyam.
It was a critical and commercial success.
Ananda Vikatan favourably reviewed the film on 8 May 1938 :.
The film is an adapted version of Premchand s novel Bazaar-e-Husn.
According to him, the film successfully broughout the sufferings of the girl and the mental agony of the aged husband.
It came as a stunning blow to the then Brahmin orthodoxy.
MS Subbulakshmi title role of the Rajasthani saint-poetess Meera in the eponymous 1945 film gave MS Subbulakshmi national prominence.
This movie was re-made in Hindi in 1947.
Awards and honours.
The great national leader and poet Sarojini Naidu called poet Sarojini Naidu Nightingale of South India.
poet Sarojini Naidu was widely honored, praised and awarded.
Some of the more popular ones include.
Some of the more popular ones was honored as a resident artist Vidhwan of Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams.
Tirupati Urban Development Authority has installed a bronze statue of M.S. Subbulakshmi at the Poornakumbham circle in the temple town.
It was unveiled by Andhra Pradesh Chief Minister Y. S. Rajasekhara Reddy on 28 May 2006.
Thangam Aiyadurai at Lady Desikachari Road, Madras, who were close friends of MS and Sadasivam.
A commemorative postage stamp on her was issued on 18-December-2005.
She was bestowed with enormous prize moneys with these awards, most of which she donated to charity.
She has given more than 200 charity concerts and raised well over Rs.
She was awarded honorary degree degrees from several Universities.
She donated many of the royalties on several best sold records to many charity organizations.
Dasa Sahitya is the literature of bhakti movement composed by devotees in honor of Lord Vishnu or one of his Avatars.
Dasa is literally servant in Kannada and sahitya is literature.
these Haridasas were preachers of bhakti to Lord Vishnu or one of his avatars.
The bhakti literature of these Haridasas is collectively referred to as Dasa Sahitya.
It is in the Kannada language.
The Haridasas contributed to the rich heritage of Karntataka music.
these Haridasas made an indelible impression on the religious and cultural life of Karnataka.
these Haridasas spread the didactic teachings in a musical form to the hearts of the common man.
Like other doyens of Indian classical music, these scholars offered pooja to Lord Vishnu through music, called naadopasana.
The Lord is described as Samagana priya ; bhakti through music is the most preferred path to reach The Lord.
The Haridasa compositions are popularly known as Devaranamas.
Compositions like Venkatachala Nilayam, Jagadoddharana, Tamboori meetidava, Krishna Nee Begane Baaro are some of the many examples of their scholarly work.
the Melakarta is a collection of fundamental ragas in Carnatic music.
Melakarta ragas are parent ragas from which other ragas may be generated.
A melakarta raga is sometimes referred as mela, karta or sampurna as well.
In Hindustani music the thaat is equivalent of the Melakarta.
There are 10 thaats in Hindustani music, though the commonly accepted melakarta scheme has 72 ragas.
Rules for the Melakarta.
Ragas must contain the following characteristics to be considered the Melakarta.
The mela system of Ragas was first propounded by Raamamaatya in Ragas work Svaramelakalanidhi c. 1550.
Ragas is considered the father of mela system of Ragas.
However, today the 72 melakarta ragas use a standardized pattern, unlike Venkatamakhis pattern, and have gained a significant following.
The scales in this page are those proposed by Govindaacharya.
Determining the Melakarta.
A hundred years after Venkatamakhins time the Katapayadi sankhya rule came to be applied to the nomenclature of the melakarta ragas.
The sankhya associates Sanskrit consonants with digits.
Thus the scale of a melakarta raga can be easily derived from its name.
For example, Harikambhoji raga starts with syllables Ha and ri, which have numbers 8 and 2 associated with them.
Reversing them we get 28.
Hence Harikambhoji is the 28th Melakarta raga.
See Katapayadi sankhya for more details and examples.
Each melakarta raga has a different scale.
This leads to 72 seven-note combinations referred to as the Melakarta ragas as follows.
Also, R must necessarily precede G and D must precede N.
This gives 2 x 6 x 6 = 72 ragas.
Finding melakarta ragas is a mathematical process.
Every raga is the janya of a melakarta raga.
This is obvious for ragas that have less than seven notes.
For such ragas This can be associated with a Melakarta which has any of the different swaras in that position.
For example, Hindolam has Rishabha and Panchama missing.
Hence, Rishabha could be considered a janya of Todi which has shuddha rishabha or with Natabhairavi which has a chathushruti rishabha.
Rishabha is popularly associated with Natabhairavi.
The 72 Melakarta ragas are split into 12 groups called chakras, each containing 6 ragas.
The ragas within the chakra differ only in the dhaivatam and nishadam notes, as illustrated below.
The name of each of the 12 chakras suggest their ordinal number as well.
These 12 chakras were also established by Venakatamakhi.
Table of Melakarta ragas.
The 72 Melakarta ragas can be divided into two parts.
suddha Madhyama and prati Madhyama ragas.
When a given suddha madhyama ragas M1 is replaced by M2, we get the corresponding prati madhyama raga.
See Katapayadi sankhya for more information on how to derive the various swaras of a raga from its melakarta number.
See swaras in Carnatic music for explanation of the notations like R1, G2, N2, etc.
Therefore each chakra has a different meaning /.
Alternate Melakarta scheme.
Muthuswami Dikshitar school followed a different set of The scales in this page as the 72 Melakarta ragas.
These were taught by Venkatamakhi.
P. S. Narayanaswamy.
Puliyur Subramaniam Narayanaswamy also spelt Narayanaswami is a Carnatic music vocalist.
He learnt music from Tiruppambaram Somasundaram Pillai, T. M. Tyagarajan and later from Semmangudi Srinivasa Iyer.
He awarded the Bala Gana Kala Rathnam at the age of 12.
He worked in All India Radio.
In 2000, he was conferred the title, ` Sangeetha Kala Acharya by the Music Academy.
The ` Padma Bhushan awarded to him by the Government of India this year comes as a crowning glory.
He has trained several enterprising violinists and instrumentalists including V.V.Ravi and Gayathri Venkataraghavan.
Dhenuka is a ragam in Carnatic music.
It is the 9th Melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
It is called Dhunibinnashadjam in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 3rd ragam in the 2nd chakra Netra.
The mnemonic name is Netra-Go.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ra gi ma pa dha nu.
Its structure is as follows :.
As it is a melakarta ragam, by definition it is a sampoorna ragam.
It is the Suddha madhyamam equivalent of Shubhapantuvarali, which is the 45th melakarta.
Dhunibinnashadjam is the 9th Melakarta in the original list compiled by Venkatamakhin.
The notes used in the scale are the same as Dhenuka.
Dhenuka has a few janya ragams associated with it.
See List of Janya Ragams for full list of ragams associated with Dhenuka.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Dhenukas notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields 3 other Melakarta ragams, namely, Shanmukhapriya, Chitrambhari and Shoolini.
The Mrdangam is a percussion instrument from India of ancient origin.
The Mrdangam is the primary rhythmic accompaniment in a Carnatic music and Newa music ensemble.
Alternate spellings include mrudangam, mrdangam, mritangam and miruthangam in Tamil.
During a percussion ensemble, the mridangam is often accompanied by the ghatam, kanjira, and the morsing.
The mridangam is thus also known as Deva Vaadyam, or Divine Instrument.
It is widely believed that the tabla, the mridangams Hindustani musical counterpart, was first constructed by splitting a mridangam in half.
With the development of the mridangam came the evolution of the tala system.
The system of talas in Carnatic music may be the most complex percussive rhythm system of any form of classical music.
Sandhi has a large role in Newa music.
One of the earliest Nepal Bhasa manuscripts on music is a treatise on this instrument called Mridanga anukaranam.
In Tamil culture, Tamil is called a tannumai.
In later works like the Silappadikaram also we find detailed references to it as in the Natyasastra.
The player of this instrument held the title tnnnnumai aruntolllil mutlvnnn, tannumai aruntozhil mutalvan.
The smaller membrane, when struck, produces higher pitched sounds with a metallic timbre.
The wider aperture produces lower pitched sounds.
This black tuning paste is known as the satham or karanai and gives the mridangam its distinct metallic timbre.
The combination of two inhomogeneous circular membranes allows for the production of unique and distinct harmonics.
Pioneering work on the mathematics of these harmonics was done by Nobel Prize winning physicist C. V. Raman.
Methods of use.
The artist tunes the instrument by varying the tension in the leather straps spanning the hull of the instrument.
The pitch can be balanced with the aid of a pitch pipe or a tambura.
The larger membrane can also be tuned in a similar manner, though The larger membrane is not done as frequently.
The mridangam is played resting it parallel to the floor.
For a left-handed percussionist, the legs and hands are switched.
Basic strokes on the mridangam :.
Many other strokes are also taught as the training becomes more advanced, which are generally used as aesthetic embellishments while playing.
These notes include gumki, and chaapu.
The combination of these finger strokes produces complex mathematical patterns that have both aesthetic and theoretical appeal.
Increasingly complex calculations and metres may be employed when the mridangam is played.
Today the mridangam is most widely used in Carnatic music performances.
These performances take place all over Southern India and are now popular all over the world.
Sandhi is used as an accompanying instrument in Yakshagana Himmela where it is called Maddale.
However, Sandhi used in Yakshagana is markedly different in structure and acoustics from the ones used in Carnatic music.
Examples include the Puddukottai school and the Thanjavur school.
Prasanna is the second musician to take the guitar to the carnatic classical stage after Sukumar Prasad.
Prasanna not only plays carnatic music but is also a jazz musician.
Some also categorize Prasannas music under world fusion.
Prasanna began learning guitar when Prasanna was ten years old and studied with Dr C.G.Shanmugaraj Phd and then Samuel Thangadurai.
After learning quite a few things on Prasanna own, in 1984, Prasanna started formal instruction with Tiruvarur Balasubramaniam.
In 1989, Prasanna gave Prasanna first professional Carnatic music concert at the Madras Music Academy.
Prasanna studied with violinist A. Kanyakumari.
Around this time, Prasanna performed several concerts in the sabhas in Chennai.
After studying engineering at the prestigious Indian Institute of Technology, Madras, Prasanna earned an.
honors degree from Berklee College of Music in Boston.
Prasanna received a Bachelors degree in Naval Architecture from the Indian Institute of Technology, Madras in 1992.
Author of Ragamorphism a carnatic guitar instruction DVD released on January 20, 2004.
Prasanna performed with several jazz artists and has also given several Carnatic concerts.
Below are some of Below albums :.
Vallikanth, C S Extended Analysis : Prasanna : Be The Change All About Jazz.
Pacchimiriam Adiyappa was a famous court musician at the Maratha kingdom of Thanjavur in the 18th century.
Pacchimiriam Adiyappa was a composer of Carnatic music.
Some of Pacchimiriam Adiyappa famous disciples were Syama Sastri, one of the Trinity of Carnatic composers, and Ghanam Krishna Iyer.
Syama Sastri compositions are in the Telugu language.
Pacchimiriam Adiyappas most famous composition is the varnam Viriboni in Bhairavi ragam.
Manavati is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Manavati is the 5th Melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
In Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music, the 5th melakarta is Manoranjani.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 5th ragam in the 1st chakra Indu.
The mnemonic name is Indu-Ma.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ra ga ma pa dhi nu.
Its structure is as follows :.
As Manavati is a melakarta ragam, by definition Manavati is a sampoorna ragam.
Manavati is the shuddha madhyamam equivalent of Pavani, which is the 41st melakarta.
Manoranjani is the 5th Melakarta in the original list compiled by Venkatamakhin.
The notes used in the scale are the same, but the ascending scale is different.
It is an shadava-sampurna raga.
Manavati has a few minor janya ragams associated with Manavati.
See List of janya ragams for full list of ragams associated with this scale.
Here are a few common compositions sung in concerts, set to Manavati.
Couple of compositions are in Manoranjani raga.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Manavatis notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields Kantamani ragam.
For further details and an illustration refer Graha bhedam on Manavati.
Saveri is a Carnatic music ragam.
This raga is a janya of the 15th Melakarta raga Mayamalavagowla.
This raga brings out karuna rasa, i.e. it brings mood of pity.
Structure and Lakshana.
This ragam is an Audava-Sampurna ragam.
The two swaras which give the raga such a characteristic are R and D.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Dr. Shobha Raju was awarded the Padma Shri by Government of India for Dr. Shobha Raju contributions to arts in 2010.
Her first audio album,  Venkateswara Geeta Malika  is globally popular among Telugu community.
Rama Rasa Vahini played a pivotal role in getting the Postal Dept of Govt.
of India to release the postage stamp of Sri Annamacharya in Annamayyapuram.
Sobha Raju was born on 30 November 1957 at Vayalpadu, Chittoor District, A.P.
Sobha Raju father R.G. Narayana Raju, a retired Deputy Collector was a native of Tirumala Reddypalle, Chitoor Dist.
and Sobha Raju first spiritual mentor, while Sobha Raju mother Smt.
Mrs. Rajyalakshmi, was Mrs. Rajyalakshmi first music teacher in Divine Music.
Mrs. Rajyalakshmi did Mrs. Rajyalakshmi B.A. with History, Economics & Divine Music from Sri.
Padmavathi Womens College, Tirupati, A. P.
Mrs. Rajyalakshmi used to sing Bhajans and recite Bhagawad Geeta during Mr. Pullaiah discourses.
WRITER : Dr. Shobha Raju is also a writer.
Dr. Shobha Raju is also the author of a few booklets like  Sripadartham ,  Pedatirumalayya Parichayam  etc.
POETESS : Dr. Shobha Raju has been composing many songs and poetry pieces right from Dr. Shobha Raju childhood.
Dr. Shobha Raju compositions are bought out into audio albums by different audio companies and temples.
Music Composer : Dr. Shobha Raju has been a well acclaimed music composer.
Different audio companies have brought out Dr. Shobha Raju albums for which Dr. Shobha Raju Dr. Shobha Raju set the music.
Dr. Shobha Raju is also the music director for the Tele serial  Sri Annamacharya.
Dr. Shobha Raju is the Director of many video programs, including the Tele serial  Sri Annamacharya.
Dr. Shobha Raju is an organizer of many events and festivals.
Awards and recognition.
Dr. Shobha Raju is a recipient of several acclaimed awards in the field of art, culture and music.
Jyotsna Srikanth is an Indian violinist and composer, performing Carnatic music and Western classical music.
Jyotsna Srikanth was born in an Andhra musical family in Bangalore, India.
Her mother, Ratna Srikantaiah, is a Carnatic musician and teacher.
Jyotsnas music training began with Carnatic vocals at age five under Ratna Srikantaiah mother.
Ratna Srikantaiah began training under R. R. Keshavamurthy, a doyen of classical Indian violin.
Ratna Srikantaiah first solo concert was at the age of nine.
Jyotsna achieved Jyotsna grading from the Royal School of Music, London.
By Jyotsna account, Jyotsna has played for over two hundred south Indian films.
Jyotsna also performs jazz and fusion, and has set up a troupe called Fusion Dreams.
Jyotsna has collaborated with the classical guitarist Simon Thacker, and the flamenco / jazz guitarist Eduardo Niebla.
, as well as Fado saxophonist Rao Kyao.
Jyotsna has lectured on comparative techniques between the Indian and western classical violin at University of Cambridge and Liverpool University.
Thyagaraja violin playing and music style has been referred to as amazing.
In 2008, Thyagaraja received a Fellowship in Carnatic Music from the Trinity College of Music, London.
Jyotsna is a practising pathologist, having received MBBS and Post-Graduate degrees in Clinical Pathology from Bangalore Medical College, Bangalore, India.
Jyotsna is married to K.V. Srikanth Sharma, has two children and lives in Music, London.
Sri Vidyabhushana is a vocalist from Karnataka.
Sri Vidyabhushana sings devotional songs, chiefly Haridasa compositions, and carnatic classical music.
Sri Vidyabhushana first album was the extremely popular Dasara Padagalu and the 100th - Tanu Ninnadu Jivana Ninnadu.
Sri Vidyabhushana was also honoured the Doctorate by Hampi University.
This trust conducts extensive musical programs to commemorate Shri Purandara Dasara Aradhana and other events.
Shri Purandara Dasara Aradhana is a native of Dakshina Kannada district.
Shri Purandara Dasara Aradhana lives with Shri Purandara Dasara Aradhana wife and two kids in Bangalore.
Shri Purandara Dasara Aradhana was the pontiff of Subrahmanya Matha, before becoming a full-time singer.
Chitravina N. Ravikiran Mysore, Karnataka, India, is one of Indias most celebrated musicians today.
He is the grandson of famous musician Gotuvadyam Narayana Iyengar.
He was quizzed by legendary musicians including Semmangudi Srinivasa Iyer, Pandit Ravi Shankar, M S Subbulakshmi and Flute T R Mahalingam.
Ravikiran trained extensively under his father, Chitravina Narasimhan.
Chitravina Narasimhan debuted as a vocalist in 1972, at Coimbatore at the age of five.
Composer and Director.
His pieces combine innovative traditionalism, inventive rhythms and often interesting lyrics and themes.
He has also created music for Western Classical Symphony Orchestras, Chamber Orchestras, String Quartets as well as Caprices for solo violins.
Operatic dance creations of Ravikirans include Lakshmi Prabhavam, Savithri, Vinayaka Vaibhavam, Ramayana and Panchakriya.
Guru and Educationalist.
Chitravina N. Ravikiran Mysore has trained and presented numerous performing disciples.
Educationalist pioneered the innovative method of tele-teaching in 1996.
Educationalist is the first guru in world music to have used the Flip teaching method through well-structured syllabuses.
online, with video lessons in the music education website.
Author and Orator.
He is also the founder of the International Foundation for Carnatic Music.
Ravikiran is one of the most decorated artistes from India at the International, National, State and artistic levels.
Millennium Festival Award - 2000.
- Best Contemporary World Album - 2001.
- Citation from City of Houston, USA.
- Citation from City of Tulsa, USA.
National & State Level :.
- President of Indias Sangeet Natak Akademi Award - 2007.
Star of India Award - 1985.
- Sanskriti Award - 1990.
- Kalaimamani - 1985.
- Kumar Gandharva Samman - 1996.
Arul Isai Selvan - 1973.
- Music Academy Senior Awards - several, since 1979.
- Lions International Award - 1979.
- Nada Sudharnava - 1980.
- Tantri Gana Visharada - 1983.
- Sangeet Samraat - 1985.
- Rotary Vocational Award - 1985.
- Madhura Naada Mannar - 1986.
- Isai Peroli - 1991.
- Sangeeta Choodamani - 1995.
- Chitravina Vidya Varidhi - 1996.
- Kumar Gandharva Award - 2000.
- Vadya Ratnakara, 2002.
- Lifetime Achievement Award, 2003.
- Harvard Sangeet Award, 2005.
- TTK Award, 2003.
- Sangeeta Sapta Saagara, 2005.
- Nalli Season Award, 2006.
- Ragalaya Sagara by Ragalaya Foundation, London, Jan 2008.
- Sangeeta Ratnakara, Cleveland, Tulsa, USA, 2010.
- Rotary Lifetime Award, July 2011.
Senavati is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Carnatic is the 7th melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
Carnatic is called Senagrani in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 1st ragam in the 2nd chakra Netra.
The mnemonic name is Netra-Pa.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ra gi ma pa dha na.
Its structure is as follows :.
The swaras in this ragam are shuddha rishabham, sadharana gandharam, shuddha madhyamam, shuddha dhaivatham and shuddha nishadham.
As Carnatic is a melakarta ragam, by definition Carnatic is a sampoorna ragam.
Carnatic is the shuddha madhyamam equivalent of Gavambhodi, which is the 43rd melakarta scale.
Senagrani is the 7th Melakarta in the original list compiled by Venkatamakhin.
The notes used in the scale are the same, but the ascending scale and descending scales are with vakra prayoga.
Senavati has a few minor janya ragams associated with it.
See List of janya ragams for ragams associated with Senavati.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Senavatis notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields 2 melakarta ragams, namely, Latangi and Sooryakantam.
For further details and an illustration refer Graha bhedam on Sooryakantam.
Mararanjani is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Carnatic is the 25th Melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
Carnatic is called Sharavati in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 1st ragam in the 5th chakra Bana.
The mnemonic name is Bana-Pa.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ri gu ma pa dha na.
Its structure is as follows :.
As Carnatic is a melakarta ragam, by definition Carnatic is a sampoorna ragam.
Carnatic is the shuddha madhyamam equivalent of Kantamani, which is the 61st melakarta.
Mararanjani has a few minor janya ragams associated with Carnatic, of which Janasammodini is one of the better known ragams.
See List of janya ragams for all ragams associated with this scale.
A few compositions set to Mararanjani are :.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Mararanjanis notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields Vanaspati, a minor melakarta ragam.
For further details and an illustration refer Graha bhedam on Vanaspati.
Hindolam is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Hindolam is an audava ragam.
Hindolam is a janya ragam, as Hindolam does not have all the seven swaras.
Hindolam is not the same as the Hindustani Hindol.
The equivalent of Hindolam in Hindustani music is Malkauns.
It is known to be a ragam that is generally beautiful and soothing to listen to.
Being symmetrical in its ascending and descending scales, it lends itself very well to improvisation and is therefore popular at concerts.
Structure and Lakshana.
Hindolam is a symmetric ragam that does not contain rishabham and panchamam.
Hindolam is a pentatonic scale.
Mohanam structure is as follows :.
This ragam uses the swaras sadharana gandharam, shuddha madhyamam, shuddha dhaivatam and kaisiki nishadam.
Hindolam is not a melakarta ragam, since Hindolam does not contain all the seven svaras.
Experts in Carnatic music hold differences of opinion on the janaka ragams that should be attributed to Hindolam.
It can be derived from both, by dropping the rishabham and panchamam.
Samajavara gamana by the maestro Tyagaraja is the most popular composition in Hindolam.
Mamavatu sri Sarasvati by Mysore Vasudevachar is another popular composition.
Here are some more kritis composed in Hindolam.
Numerous bhajans, stotras, kritis and film music numbers also have been composed in the Hindolam ragam.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Hindolams notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields 4 other major pentatonic ragams, namely, Mohanam, Shuddha Saveri, Udayaravichandrika and Madhyamavati.
For more details and illustration of this concept refer Graha bhedam on Mohanam.
Sahana is a popular ragam in Carnatic music.
Carnatic is a janya ragam associated with the 28th Melakarta ragam Harikambhoji.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is a Ubhaya Vakra sampoorna ragam.
Ubhaya Vakra means crooked.
Ubhaya Vakra means that the notes in both ascent and descent follow a zig zag pattern.
The notes in ascending and descending scale do not follow a strict progression.
Hence the note phrases contain such vakra phrases, lending a unique beauty to this ragam.
Structure and Lakshana . is also classified as a rakti raga.
Structure and Lakshana . structure is as follows :.
The notes used in this scale are Shadjam, Chathusruthi Rishabham, Antara Gandharam, Suddha Madhyamam, Panchamam, Chathusruthi Dhaivatham and Kaisiki Nishadham.
Shadjam characteristic phrases are, ,,.
Sahana has a distinct mood due to these phrases and characteristic gamakams and is rarely confused with other ragams.
Sahana has a close relationship to Dwijawanthi.
The use of Anthara Gaandharam in R2 G2 R2 makes it different from Dwijawanthi, while Dwijawanthi uses Saadharana Gaandharam.
There are a large number of popular songs composed in this ragam in Carnatic Music as well as Tamil Film Music.
Here are some Carnatic music compositions.
Mavelikkara S. R. Raju.
Mavelikara S. R. Raju is an acclaimed Carnatic music percussionist.
Mavelikara S. R. Raju is adept in playing the mridangam.
Mavelikara S. R. Raju is the sishya of the celebrated Mridangam maestro Mavelikara Krishnankutty Nair.
Mavelikara S. R. Raju father M.N. Raghavan Pillai, was a mridangam player who played for harikathas and dramas.
So right from childhood, he has had a fascination for the mridangam.
In 1958 he joined All India radio as a mridangam artiste.
In 1999 Kerala Sangeetha Nadaka Academy granted its fellowship to him.
Madurai Mani Iyer.
Madurai Mani Iyer was a Carnatic music singer, who was famous for his unique style.
He was one of the most highly celebrated carnatic vocalists during the first half of the 20th century.
He was renowned for his adept skills at singing kalpana swarams, neraval, and raga alapana.
His music continues to be highly regarded today.
His father, a Sub-court Clerk, was the brother of the famous Vidwan Pushpavanam, who was a great classical musician himself.
Mani Iyers tutelage in music started at the age of nine.
a Sub-court Clerk first guru was Sri Rajam Bhagavathar who was Disciple of Ettayapuram Ramachandra Bhagavathar.
Iyers prodigious talents were recognized early in his age as he received various honours from dignitaries of that time.
In 1927, a music conference took place at the Congress session in Avadi.
In that was arranged a programme on the 72 melaragamalika of Maha Vaidyanatha Iyer.
Manis father expounded on the theoretical aspect of the composition while Mani sang.
Mani and son walked away with the awards.
He loved Bernard Shaw and was a fan of Charlie Chaplin.
A compulsive listener of both the English and the Tamil news, Mani Iyer was a keen observer of politics too.
Shuddha Saveri is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Carnatic is an audava ragam.
Carnatic is a janya ragam, as Carnatic does not have all the seven swaras.
The equivalent of Shuddha Saveri in Hindustani music is Durga.
According to the school of Muthuswami Dikshitar, this ragam is called Devakriya.
Karnataka Shuddha Saveri, a janya ragam of 1st melakarta Kanakangi, is called Shuddha Saveri by the Dikshitar school.
Structure and Lakshana.
Shuddha Saveri is a symmetric ragam that does not contain gandharam or nishadam.
Structure and Lakshana . is a pentatonic scale.
Structure and Lakshana . structure is as follows :.
It is a scale that uses the following variants of the swaras - chatushruti rishabham, shuddha madhyamam, panchamam and chatushruti dhaivatam.
Here are some popular kritis composed in Shuddha Saveri.
Analekara, which is set to this ragam, is one of the first few geetams taught to beginners.
Sree guru guha is a song set by muthuswami dikshitar.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Shuddha Saveris notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields 4 other major pentatonic ragams, namely, Mohanam, Hindolam, Madhyamavati and Udayaravichandrika.
See Graha bhedam on Mohanam for more details and illustration of this concept.
Gavambodhi is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Carnatic is the 43rd Melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
Carnatic is called or in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 1st ragam in the 8th chakra Vasu.
The mnemonic name is Vasu-Pa.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ra gi mi pa dha na.
The mnemonic phrase structure is as follows :.
As Carnatic is a melakarta ragam, by definition Carnatic is a sampoorna ragam.
Carnatic is the prati madhyamam equivalent of Senavati, which is the 7th melakarta.
Gavambodhi has a few minor janya ragams associated with Carnatic.
See List of janya ragams for all janya ragams associated with Gavambodhi.
A few compositions set to Gavambodhi are :.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Gavambodhis notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields a minor melakarta ragam Hatakambari.
For further details and an illustration refer Graha bhedam on Hatakambari.
Parthasarathy Swami Sabha.
Parthasarathy Swami Sabha is a Carnatic music Sabha in the city of Chennai, India.
It is one of the oldest of its kind in existence.
The Parthasarathy Swami Sabha was founded by Manni Thirumalachariar in 1900.
The sabha acquired its first permanent venue, the site of a cremation ground, in 1959.
In 1962, the sabha constructed an open air theatre.
Ranjani and Gayatri are Carnatic concert vocalists and violinists, and sisters.
Ranjani and Gayatri were born to N. Balasubramanian and Meenakshi.
As violin duet artists.
Ranjani and Gayatri began their music career as violin duet artistes even before they reached their teens.
Through their intense training from Sangita Bhooshanam Prof. T. S. Krishnaswami, they quickly established themselves as top-class violinists of international repute.
The sisters achieved success as violin duet performers, and subsequently they also proved successful as violin accompanists.
Both Ranjani and Gayatri have accompanied various artists on the violin, including D.K. Pattammal.
As vocal artists.
The sisters have given vocal concerts since 1997, after they became students of Padma Bhushan Sangeeta Kala Acharya P. S. Narayanaswamy.
They have learnt quite a few Bhajans from vocalist Seetha Narayanan.
Within barely three years, they won high praises from critics and music lovers all over the globe.
Their music, imbued with a deep and abiding classicism, has been described as an exhilarating blend of vitality, melody and emotion.
They have to their credit several album releases, both violin and vocal.
Apart from singing, Ranjani and Gayatri also have an interest for composing music.
A few of the abhangs they sing at the end of their concerts have been set to music by them.
They have also set many other thukkada pieces, including a few Bhajans.
Here is a list of some of the songs set by the sisters :.
Ranjani and Gayatri have received multiple awards and recognitions throughout their career.
In addition, various music personalities from all over India have recognized their talent.
Here is a list of the awards and recognitions received by the sisters :.
Ranjani and Gayatri have various albums to their credit.
Here is a list of some of the albums that have been released :.
Muttuthandavar was a prominent Saivite poet based in the temple town of Chidambaram.
Life and compositions.
Muttuthandavar was born in town of Shiyali.
Muttuthandavar parents were both musicians at the temple of Shiva at Shiyali.
However, physical disability arising from a disease which afflicted Muttuthandavar in Muttuthandavar youth prevented Muttuthandavar from becoming a musician.
Muttuthandavar used to sing a song everyday starting from the first word which fell on Muttuthandavar ears.
On a particular day, as Muttuthandavar was singing, Muttuthandavar died all of a sudden.
All Muttuthandavar chants have been preserved and form some of the best devotional hymns in Tamil language.
V.P Dhananjayan was born into a Malayali Nair family on 17 April 1939 in Payyanur, Kannur District, Kerala, present day India.
Dhananjayan joined Kalakshetra on 5 October 1953 and was a leading male dance under Rukmini Devi from 1955-1967.
She was a leading female dancer at Kalakshetra from 1955-1968.
The couple have two sons.
Dhananjayan received a scholarship at Kalakshetra to study Bharatanatyam, Kathakali, Mridangam and music.
Shanta when she was 18 trained in Bharatanatyam and music apart from other subjects for nearly a decade.
While at Kalakshetra, Kalakshetra was love at first sight for Dhananjayan.
They married in 1966 at the Guruvayoor Temple in Kerala.
Career - Dancing Duo.
The Dhananjayans left Kalakshetra in the late 1960s to build a career on They own.
They started to receive invitations from both within the country and from abroad.
They have traveled all over the world to major cultural centers to present their art.
Some of their major performances/productions include :.
The Dhananjayans place particular emphasis on imparting Indian tradition and culture to their bharata natyam students.
Some details about which they are particular are :.
The Dhananjayans started their own dance school Bharata Kalanjali in 1968 in Adyar, Chennai.
The couple has established an academy of arts at Dhananjayans birthplace Payyanur in Kerala.
They conducted an annual summer Naatya Gurukulam camp which is no longer in operation.
The Dhananjayans have been conducting an annual summer gurukulam camp at the Satchidananda Ashram, Yogaville, Virginia, USA, since 1988.
Developed by the Natya Adyayana Gurukulam, the camp is an intensive, full-time residential course devoted entirely to the fine arts.
Situated in the Virginia countryside, the Virginia countryside is attended by Indian-American and international students.
Some of the major awards and accolades conferred on the Dhananjayans :.
Social issues and Politics.
Dhananjayan has the reputation of voicing his views and is very forthright in speaking out about social and political issues.
V.P Dhananjayan is a prolific writer and writes not only on dance but also on social and political issues.
His publications include :.
Shanmukhapriya and Haripriya, popularly known as the Priya Sisters, are eminent Carnatic music singers.
In order to nurture Shanmukhapriya and Haripriya musical talent, Shanmukhapriya and Haripriya father shifted base to Chennai.
Improving Shanmukhapriya and Haripriya repertoire was a major project and learning, a continuous process.
Hence Shanmukhapriya and Haripriya joined Professor T.R.Subramaniam.
Shanmukhapriya and Haripriya learnt many pallavis and kritis from him.Currently, Shanmukhapriya and Haripriya are under the guidance of T. R. Subramaniam.
Dwaram Bhavanarayana Rao.
Dwaram Bhavanarayana Rao was famous Violinist and son of legendary Padmasri Dwaram Venkataswamy Naidu.
Dwaram Bhavanarayana Rao . is born to Dwaram Venkataswamy Naidu and Venkata Jaggayyamma on 15 June 1924 at Bapatla.
Dwaram Bhavanarayana Rao . was educated in Chennai.
Dwaram Bhavanarayana Rao . was trained by Dwaram Bhavanarayana Rao . father, and the late Prof. P. Sambamurthy.
Dwaram Bhavanarayana Rao . has also worked as Principal of Government Music College at Vijayawada.
Dwaram Bhavanarayana Rao . was also translated some of the music theory books but they were not in print.
Dwaram Bhavanarayana Rao . died of Cardiac arrest at Dwaram Bhavanarayana Rao . residence in Visakhapatnam on 24 July 2000.
Dwaram Bhavanarayana Rao . was 76 years of age and is survived by wife, three sons and two daughters.
Dwaram Bhavanarayana Rao . was the recipient of Andhra Pradesh Sangita Nataka Academy award and Sangita Kalaprapoorna award from Andhra University.
Dwaram Bhavanarayana Rao . was a member of the advisory board of the Madras Music Academy.
Malayamarutam is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Malayamarutam is a janya ragam, as Malayamarutam does not have all the seven swaras.
This scale is used in Hindustani music in recent years by instrumentalists.
This is a morning raga and regularly used in programmes and functions of the mornings.
Structure and Lakshana.
Malayamarutam is a symmetric ragam that does not contain madhyamam.
Malayamarutam is a hexatonic scale.
Malayamarutam structure is as follows :.
The notes used in this scale are shadjam, shuddha rishabham, antara gandharam, panchamam, chathusruthi dhaivatham and kaisiki nishadam.
Malayamarutam is a pleasing scale, but has only a few compositions in classical music.
Malayamarutam has been used to score film music as well.
Here are some popular kritis composed in Malayamarutam.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Alathur Srinivasa Iyer.
Alathur Srinivasa Iyer, born in an Iyer Brahmin family in Tamil Nadu, was an Indian vocalist.
A student of Alathur Venkatesa Iyer, Srinivasa gave his first performances when he was ten years old.
From 1944 to 1968.
He was a court musician for the Maharajah of Travancore.
He lived longer than his partner, Alathur Sivasubramania Iyer and performed many solo concerts after the death of Sivasubramania Iyer.
Swaramelakalanidhi is a much celebrated musicological treatise of 16th century Vijayanagara.
Minor ideological difference can however be discerned among these works.
Ramamatya was the grandson of the illustrious Kallinatha.
He was also the royal composer and architect at the court of king Ramaraja.
He described himself as abhinavabharatacharya and todara-malla who wears the honorific anklet.
The Kannada term means hero who wears the honorific anklet.
The Svaramelakalanidhi brings the theory up to date, rationalizes intervals and scales, introduces the concepts of svayambhu-svara,.
dharashruti paryayatattva and pratinidhitattva of svaras.
Mukhari is established as the shuddhasvara saptaka.
Among other things, it also innovates and dedicates a new keyboard to king Achyutaraya.
It also resolves the problem of the antara and kaishiki notes.
The work is divided into five chapters viz. ,.
He performed in the esteemed presence of the then Maharaja of Mysore at the age of 12.
The Maharaja liked the Maharaja of Mysore performance and awarded the Maharaja of Mysore a 50 rupee silver coin.
the Maharaja of Mysore gave the Maharaja of Mysore first public performance in 1943, in the Bangalore Gayana Samaja.
Over the course of the Maharaja of Mysore career, accolades poured in.
the Maharaja of Mysore studied BA in the Maharajas College, Mysore.
the Maharaja of Mysore was the music director of the All India Radio in the Bangalore Gayana Samaja.
The University of Mysore conferred on the Maharaja of Mysore an Honorary Doctorate in 1975.
the other Vainikas style of playing is sometimes referred to as the Mysore style.
This style is marked by the movements from one note to another, achieved with the playing fingers parted.
The Veena is a solo instrument and is accompanied only by percussion instruments.
However, the concerts of Doreswamy Iyengar accompanied by Mysore T Chowdiah on the violin became very popular.
He has participated in many Jugalbandis including other famous musicians such as Ustad Ali Akbar Khan.
He also composed music for dance dramas, especially those of P. T. Narasimhachar or pu ti na, a renowned Kannada poet.
Another Vainika of note, who was Doreswamy Iyengar 's disciple, was C. Krishnamurthy.
Doriswamy Iyengar also composed music for a few Kannada films, notably Subbashastri, starring Kalyan Kumar.
the Minister of Education was the Minister of Education in the court of the local king Venkata Perumal.
Some of the Minister of Education popular Padams are Mogadochi, Pattakura, and Upamugane.
Vellore A. R. Srinivasan.
Dr. Vellore A. R. Srinivasan was born May 6, 1962 at Vellore, Tamil Nadu, Pondicherry, India.
Dr. Vellore A. R. Srinivasan learnt the art of playing percussion instruments from Vidwan Vellore C.M.Kuttiappa.
Presently, Dr. Vellore A. R. Srinivasan is receiving advanced training in percussion from the well known Guru Tiruvarur Sri R.Krishnamoorthy.
Multifaceted musician : - Vellore Srinivasan has performed for temples and educational institutions.
As a percussionist, he plays the kanjira and morsing.
He has composed over 800 songs that include keerthanas on many deities of the Hindu pantheon.
He has composed songs on the religious philosophers and seers of Pondicherry, India.
He has received awards and titles which include Nadayoga Shironmani, instituted by YOGNAT.
He is included in the Musicians ' Diary for his work in Carnatic vocals, along with his Kanjira and morsing work.
For popular Telugu film actress see Suryakantham.
Suryakantam or Sooryakantam is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Suryakantam is the 17th melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
Suryakantam is called Chayavati in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 5th ragam in the 3rd chakra Agni.
The mnemonic name is Agni-Ma.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ra gu ma pa dhi nu.
Its structure is as follows :.
This scale uses the swaras, shuddha rishabham, antara gandharam, shuddha madhyamam, chathusruthi dhaivatham and kakali nishadham.
As Suryakantam is a melakarta ragam, by definition Suryakantam is a ragam.
Suryakantam is the shuddha madhyamam equivalent of Gamanashrama, which is the 53rd melakarta scale.
Chayavati is the 17th Melakarta in the original list compiled by Venkatamakhin.
Suryakantam has many janya ragams associated with Suryakantam, of which Vasanta, Sowrashtram and Bhairavam are popular in concerts, set to Suryakantam.
See List of janya ragams for those associated with Suryakantam.
Here are a few common compositions sung in concerts, set to Suryakantam, set to Suryakantam.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Suryakantams notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields 2 melakarta ragams, namely Senavati and Latangi.
For further details and an illustration refer Graha bhedam on Suryakantam.
An integral part of Kannada Vaishnava devotional literature, these compositions in praise of the Hindu god Vishnu are called dasara padagalu.
These compositions can be more specifically categorized as keertanas, suladis, ugabhogas, and simply padas.
Vijaya Dasa was born in a poor Brahmin family in Cheekalaparvi in Manvi taluk of Raichur district, Karnataka state.
His parents were Sri Srinivasappa and Kusamma.
Sri Srinivasappa left home at a young age and studied Sanskrit in Varanasi for four years.
Later when Sri Srinivasappa marriage was troubled by poverty, Sri Srinivasappa went back to Varanasi where Sri Srinivasappa became a scholar.
From that day Sri Srinivasappa was called Vijaya Dasa, and dedicated Sri Srinivasappa life to spreading Dvaita teachings.
Compositions and ministry.
Sri Srinivasappa 25,000 extant compositions earned Sri Srinivasappa the title Dasa Shresta.
These hills are the location of the Tirumala Venkateswara Temple, an important pilgrim locations for Vaishnava Hindus.
Carnatic raga refers to ragas used in Carnatic music.
A Carnatic raga has several components - primordial sound, tonal system, pitch, scale, ornaments and important tones.
Origins and history.
Carnatic raga classification.
Janaka ragas used in Carnatic music.
Janaka ragas . ragas are parent ragas from which more ragas are derived.
They are also called Melakarta ragas.
These ragas have all 7 swaras in They scales, following strict ascending and descending scales and are sung in all octaves.
Janya ragas are derived from Janaka ragas . ragas.
See full list of Janya ragas.
Components of Carnatic raga.
A Carnatic raga has several components - primordial sound, tonal system, intervals, scale, ornaments and important tones.
A Carnatic raga consists of an ascending and descending scale pattern.
Both ascent and descent should have at least five tones, although rarer ragas contain fewer tones.
Scales establish rules for all performers to adhere to in melodic performance, and provide a tonal boundary.
Typical scale features also act to help listeners identify ragas used in Carnatic music.
Gamaka, or ornamentation, is essential in Carnatic raga performance.
Gamaka encompasses controlled shaking, articulating, sliding, glottal stops and other vocal or instrumental manipulation.
The swara and scale defines only the skeletal structure of a raga.
The handling of Gamaka actually defines the raga.
Raga in improvisation.
Improvisation in raga is the soul of Indian classical music - an essential aspect.
Manodharma sangeetham or kalpana sangeetham as Manodharma sangeetham is known in Carnatic music, embraces several varieties of improvisation.
Kalpanaswaram, also known as swarakalpana, consists of improvising melodic and rhythmic passages using swaras.
Tanam is one of the most important forms of improvisation, and is integral to Ragam-Tanam-Pallavi.
Originally developed for the veena, Tanam consists of expanding the raga with syllables like tha, nam, thom, aa, nom, na, etc.
Ragam-Tanam-Pallavi is the principal long form in concerts, and is a composite form of improvisation.
As the name suggests, it consists of raga alapana, tanam, and a pallavi line.
Set to a slow-paced tala, the pallavi line is often composed by the performer.
Through niraval, the performer manipulates the pallavi line in complex melodic and rhythmic ways.
The niraval is followed by kalpanaswarams.
Learning and performing.
When learning a raga, it is never enough just to know the basic scale of the raga.
In fact, different ragas can sometimes have the same scales.
This is especially true for heavier ragas like Yadhukula Kambodhi, Thodi, Sahana, Huseni, Varali, etc.
An interesting case to observe is the similarity between the ragas Darbar and Nayaki.
Both are upanga janyas of the 22nd mela Kharaharapriya, and have similar patterns in both Both ascending and descending scales.
However the two ragas are distinctly different, especially where the usage of the gandhara and nishada are concerned.
Before an artist attempts to sing a raga, he or Nayaki should be familiar with several compositions in that raga.
Raga in non-classical traditions.
Raga in Harikatha.
The Harikatha tradition, which originated in the Indian state of Maharashtra, involves popular storytelling combined with dance and music.
In effect, harikatha is an art form that requires knowledge of raga, Carnatic music, dance, speech, diction and dramatic technique.
Harikatha performance aims to communicate with non-literate and literate audiences.
Raga and light classical music.
Raga in film songs.
Mand Raaga - Tu Chanda main Chandani.
A drone effect can be achieved through a sustained sound or through repetition of a note.
A drone effect most often establishes a tonality upon which the rest of the piece is built.
A drone can be instrumental, vocal or both.
History and distribution.
In the West, they are found since the 1960s in modern drone music.
In vocal music drone is particularly widespread in traditional musical cultures, particularly in Europe, Polynesia and Melanesia.
Part of a musical instrument.
Different melodic Indian instruments contain a drone.
For example, the sitar features three or four resonating drone strings, and Indian notes are practiced to a drone.
Bagpipes feature a number of drone pipes, giving the instruments their characteristic sounds.
A hurdy-gurdy has one or more drone strings.
The bass strings of the Slovenian drone zither also freely resonate as a drone.
The Welsh Crwth also features two drone strings.
Effect in musical compositions.
Examples include the following :.
On the other hand, drones may be purposely dissonant, as often found in the music of Phill Niblock.
Later drone pieces include Loren Rush s Hard Music, Folke Rabe s Was ??.
, and Robert Erickson s Down at Piraeus.
Contemporary folk music uses the drone effect extensively.
The music of Italian composer Giacinto Scelsi is essentially drone-based.
Shorter drones or the general concept of a continuous element are often used by many other composers.
Other composers whose music is entirely based on drones include Charlemagne Palestine and Phill Niblock.
Drone was virtually absent in original RocknRoll music, but gained popularity after The Beatles used drone in a few popular compositions.
They also used high drone for the dramatic effect in some sections of several of their compositions.
The rock ensemble U2 uses drones in their compositions particularly widely.
Also the avant-garde guitarist Glenn Branca uses drones extensively.
A drone differs from a pedal tone or point in degree or quality.
Use for musical training.
A Shruti box is often used by vocalists in this style of musical training.
V. Selvaganesh is also known as Chella S. Ganesh.
V. Selvaganesh gained world fame through tours with John McLaughlin s group, Remember the original Shakti.
Their Indo - Celtic album entitled Turn on the dreams was released in the UK in 2005.
In 2012, V. Selvaganesh made V. Selvaganesh film directorial debut with Bodhai, a short film in Tamil.
V. Selvaganesh also composed the four-track soundtrack which was released in digital format by Saregama.
V. Selvaganesh made V. Selvaganesh debut composing for films with the Tamil movie Vennila Kabadi Kuzhu.
Madhyamavati is a raga in Carnatic music.
Carnatic is an audava raga.
Carnatic is a janya raga, as Carnatic does not have all the seven musical notes.
The equivalent of Madhyamavati in Hindustani music is Madhumad Sarang.
It is very suitable for elaboration and exploration due to even spacing of notes.
Structure and Lakshana.
Madhyamavati is a symmetric ragam that does not contain gandharam or dhaivatam.
Structure and Lakshana . is a pentatonic scale.
Structure and Lakshana . structure is as follows :.
This scale uses the notes chatushruti rishabham, shuddha madhyamam, panchamam and kaisiki nishadam.
Madhyamavati ragam lends Madhyamavati for extensive elaboration and exploration and has many compositions.
Here are some popular kritis composed in this scale.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Madhyamavatis notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields 4 other major pentatonic ragams, namely, Mohanam, Hindolam, Shuddha Saveri and Udayaravichandrika.
For more details and illustration of this concept refer Graha bhedam on Mohanam.
M. S. Sheela.
Carnatic has the rare distinction of being a top rank artist of AIR and Doordarshan in both classical and light music.
M. S. Sheela hails from a family of musicians.
M. S. Sheela . has a postgraduate degree in Music from Bangalore University, and is a Gold medallist.
M S Sheela started giving musical performances from a very young age.
M. S. Sheela . has performed widely across India and abroad.
M. S. Sheela . has given performance in USA, Canada and Australia.
M. S. Sheela . was sponsored by the State Government of Karnataka for M. S. Sheela . US concert tour.
M S Sheela has also performed in musical concerts in Middle East and London.
Ninada renditions of Lalithasahasranama, Sharada Suprabhata, Venkateshwara Suprabhata, Soundarya Lahari etc. are widely popular and in great demand.
M S Sheela is the first woman artist from Karnataka who has a top rank in Carnatic music.
Carnatic is also the first top rank artist from the state of Karnataka in Sugama Sangeetha.
M. S. Sheela . is a trained Bharatanatyam Dancer and has given dance performances till the early 90s.
Contributions to Indian Classical Music.
Haridasa Namana, Palinchu Kamakshi, Guru Raghavendra are some of her audio releases through Hamsadhwani Creations.
An annual Hamsadhwani festival is also observed by Hamsadhwani creations.
They also felicitate great achievers of the field through Hamsadhwani Puraskara.
Awards and honours.
Karnataka State Government has honoured M. S. Sheela . with Rajyothsava Award.
M. S. Sheela . is also an Asthana Vidushi of Sri Jagadguru Shankaracharya Mahasamsthanam Dakshinamnaya Sri Sarada Peetham, Sringeri.
M. S. Sheela . is the recipient of Gaurava Puraskara of Karnataka Sangeeta Nritya Academy for the year 2007.
Some of the titles bestowed upon M. S. Sheela . :.
S. A. K. Durga.
Dr. S. A. Kumari Durga is a musicologist and ethnomusicologist from the Indian state of Tamil Nadu.
Dr. S. A. Kumari Durga is the founder of the Centre for Ethnomusicology based in Chennai.
Dr. S. A. Kumari Durga grandfather, S. A. Swaminatha Iyer, was a famous patron of Carnatic music.
Dr. S. A. Kumari Durga had Dr. S. A. Kumari Durga advanced training from T. Viswanathan and Balamuralikrishna.
Dr. S. A. Kumari Durga learnt Hindustani classical music from Ustad Mohammed Munnawar of Delhi.
Durga pursued Dr. S. A. Kumari Durga postgraduate education in voice culture at the University of Madras.
Dr. S. A. Kumari Durga completed Dr. S. A. Kumari Durga doctorate in ethnomusicology at Wesleyan University, USA.
On March 8, 1984, Dr. S. A. Kumari Durga performed at a celebration marking the 150th anniversary of Wesleyan University.
Awards and honors.
In 1984, Dr. S. A. Kumari Durga was awarded the Eleanor Roosevelt International Fellowship of International Federation of University of Women.
Dr. S. A. Kumari Durga is the first Asian to have written a book on ethnomusicology.
From January 25, 2000 to May 23, 2000, Dr. S. A. Kumari Durga wrote a weekly column on ethnomusic for chennaionline.com.
Charumathi Ramachandran is a Carnatic music singer.
Carnatic is a disciple of M.L. Vasanthakumari.
Carnatic was a gold medalist and stood first in music from the Madras University.
Carnatic was the first carnatic vocalist to introduce Hindustani forms in Hindustani music.
Carnatic is married to Trichur V. Ramachandran, who is also a well known Carnatic vocalist.
Madhuvanti is the name of a raga used in Indian classical music.
This Raag is based on Kalyan Thaat.It is a romantic raga based on the foundation, eternity and colors of love.
Madhu literally means honey.
Madhu is a very sweet raga with a very simple philosophy of love and romance.
Madhuvanti belongs to thaat Todi.
Madhuvanti is played after 4 pm before 8 pm.
Madhuvanti expresses a gentle loving sentiment.
Refer to the introduction.
Madhuvanti is the janya raga of the 59th Melakarta of Carnatic Music, Dharmavati.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . structure is as follows :.
The notes used are Chathusruthi Rishabham, Sadharana Gandharam, Prati Madhyamam, Chathusruthi Dhaivatham and Kakali Nishadham.
Notations of Carnatic music and Hindustani music differ a little bit.
Carnatic is an audava-sampurna raga.
Madhuvanti is a very melodious raga.
This raga has been used to compose many tukadas.
Sri Sadasiva Brahmendras composition, Sarvam Brahmamayam is often rendered in this raga.
It has also been used in Indian movie songs and music as it lends itself to lilting melodies.
List of Film Songs based on Ragas.
T. V. Ramprasadh.
T. V. Ramprasadh is one of the prominent Carnatic classical vocalists of India.
Musical lineage and style.
T. V. Ramprasadh . has trained students in India and other countries.
T. V. Ramprasadh . has conducted workshops and undertaken teaching assignments in UK, US, Germany, France, the Netherlands, Austria and Malaysia.
Nagarathnamma was born in a devadasi family of Bangalore in 1878.
a devadasi family of Bangalore mother was Puttalakshmi amma.
Her mother ancestors served as singers and musicians in the court of Mysore.
She sung in Kannada, Sanskrit and Telugu.
Narahari Rao, a judge in the Mysore High Court was one of Nagarathnammas patrons.
Nagarathnamma inaugurated the Tyagaraja Aradhana festival in honour of the singer Tyagaraja at Thiruvaiyaru in Tanjore district in 1926.
the singer Tyagaraja also constructed the Tyagaraja Temple in 1921.
Nagarathnamma also discovered the long-lost Radhika Santwanam a book on devadasi arts written by Muddupalani and tried to popularize it.
Nagarathnamma died in 1952 at the age of 74.
Chingleput Ranganathan was a classical Carnatic vocalist and Guru.
Early life and background.
Chingleput Chelappa Ranganathan, was born in Chennai on 3 June 1938 to Sriman Chellappa Iyengar and Srimathi Rajalakshmi.
His mother used to be a student of Harihara Iyer, a disciple of the Carnatic music great, Tiger Varadachariar.
Ranganathan used to regularly accompany his mother to His mother music lessons.
He then became a disciple of Flute Vidwan H.Ramachandra Shastri.
It was Shastri who felt that he had the potential to train under the stalwart, Alathur Venkatesa Iyer.
He thus entered the tutelage of Venkatesa Iyer of the Manambuchavadi lineage of Thyagaraja shishya parampara.
His Arangetram was held in the Nerur Sadasiva Bramendral Utsavam in the year 1955.
He obtained the prize from the First President of India, Dr. Rajendra Prasad.
a staff artiste at the AIR died on 12 July 2011.
Acclaimed Vidwan that he was set to tune, thiruppugazh in the 72 melakartha ragas.
Chingleput C.Ranganathan is married to Smt.Lakshmi Ranganathan on August 26, 1968.
Chingleput C.Ranganathan died on 12 July 2011.
Chingleput C.Ranganathan is survived by two sons Sri.R.Sai Krishnan & R.Sai Narasimhan both are specialists in playing flute Classical Music.
Chingleput C.Ranganathan Second Son R.Sai Narasimhan is a Singer, Flautist, Music Composer, Mimicry Artist & TV Personality.
the Akademi Puraskar Awards and honorary titles.
-  SANGEETHA ACHARYA  in the year 1991 by Guruji H.H.Swamy Haridoss Giri Swamigal.
-  NADAKKANAL  in the year 1992 at the Bharathiyar Festival held in Chennai.
-  GAYAKA KALANIDHI  in the year 1999 by Srirangam Srimad Andavan Sri Ranga Ramanuja Maha Desigan.
-  THIRUPPUGAZH MAMANI  in August 1999 by Vadapalani Thiruppugazh Sabha, Chennai.
-  SANGEETHA KALA ACHARYA  in January 2000 by The Music Academy, Chennai.
-  KALA RATNA  by Rasika Ranjani Sabha, Chennai, December 2002.
-  CARNATIC MUSIC PALLAVI WIZARD  in April 2005 by Rajah Annamalaipuram Bhakta Jana Sabha.
-  SWARA RAGA SARAGNAR  in 2005 at the Panchamukha Anjaneyar Utsavam, Mylapore.
-  LAYA KALA NIPUNA  by Percussive Arts Centre, Palghat Mani Iyer Memorial Trust, Bangalore on May 29, 2006.
-  SANGEETHA KALA SAGARAM  by Bhargavi Fine Arts, Cleveland in April 2007 at the St. Thiagaraja Utsavam, Cleveland, USA.
-  SANGITA NATAKA AKADEMI AWARD  - March 2007 2007 AT SANGITA NATAKA AKADEMI DELHI.
Received from the hands of our honourable president Dr.A.P.J.
the Akademi Puraskar Awards and honours.
Puranam Purushottama Sastri.
Puranam Purushottama Sastri was an eminent Carnatic Musician and winner of Sangeet Natak Akademi Award.
Puranam Purushottama Sastri . is son of Puranam Kanakayya Sastri.
Puranam Purushottama Sastri . was born in Nallapadu in Guntur district in 1925.
Puranam Purushottama Sastri . father Kanakayya Sastri was also famous musician and Asthana Vidwan of Gadwal Samsthanam and Yadagirigutta Devasthanam.
His father Kanakayya Sastri went to Madras to pursue advanced music.
His father Kanakayya Sastri took diploma in Music from Central College of Carnatic Music in 1952.
Musiri Subramania Iyer was the principal and also Musiri Subramania Iyer guru for a decade.
At home, Musiri Subramania Iyer became known for Musiri Subramania Iyer rich vocal compass, manodharma, laya gnanam and gamaka pushti.
Sastry was an undisputed expert in singing Pallavi.
Sastry has also applied ragas to cure some diseases and to activate clouds for rain in prolonged drought.
Sastry died in February 2010.
Arunachala Kavi was a Hanumar Pillai Tamil poet and a composer of Carnatic music.
a Tamil poet was born in Tillaiyadi in Thanjavur District in Tamil Nadu.
Arunachala Kavi was fluent in Hanumar Pillai Tamil, Telugu and Sanskrit.
Hanumar Pillai Tamil wrote Rama Natakam, a musical drama based on the Ramayana.
The music for this musical was composed by two of Arunachala Kavis disciples, Kothandarama Iyer and Venkatarama Iyer.
The songs contain many Hanumar Pillai Tamil proverbs and sayings.
This musical drama was first performed at the Srirangam temple and within a short time it became very popular.
Arunachala Kavi was honoured by Maharaja Tulaja, the King of Tanjavur, and by several other patrons of that time.
Maharaja Tulaja also composed Seergazhi Sthala Puranam, Seergazhi Kovai, Hanumar Pillai Tamil, Ajomukhi Natakam and a few Keertanas.
Sundaram Balachander, born in Madras was an Indian self-taught veena player.
He was also an accomplished film maker as a producer, director, music director, actor, singer and dancer.
His grandfather is Rao Saheb Vaidyanatha Iyer.
Rao Saheb Vaidyanatha Iyer was born to V. Sundaram Iyer and Parvathi alias Chellamma.
Papanasam Sivan elder brother S. Rajam is a well-known singer and teacher, and a gifted artist as well.
From age six on His elder brother S. Rajam career achieved steady growth.
His elder brother S. Rajam also learnt to play tabla, mridangam, harmonium, bulbul tarang, dilruba, and shehnai.
Falling in love with the instrument, from the beginning he felt that it deserved his undivided attention and every skill.
Without a tutor or master to guide him, within two years he was an established concert veena player.
Balachander also possessed a substantial knowledge of North Indian Hindustani classical music, and a keen appreciation of Western classical music.
He traveled all over the world, and won international fame as an instrumentalist of rare repute.
The famous electric bassist Mark Egan cites Balachander as a major influence on his music.
At one time, Balachander held the record for cutting the highest number of records.
The 12 LP set encompassing the 72 melakartas is a piece of work that has no parallel.
Immortal is also known for Immortal work in cinema, Immortal writing and Immortal polemics.
Balachander was awarded the Padma Bhushan in 1982.
Followed by Rishyasringar and Aaraichi Mani or Manuneethi Chozhan.
Aaraichi Mani other Tamil movies that Aaraichi Mani acted include Devaki, Rajambal, Rani, Inspector, Penn, Kodeeswaran, Doctor Savitri and Maragadham.
Aaraichi Mani had acted, directed, composed music and sang in Idhu Nijama, En Kanavar and Kaidhi.
Others directions include Bhoologa Rambai and Avan Amaran.
Bhoologa Rambai has directed a Telugu film in 1956 entitled Edi Nijam produced by Ghantasala Krishnamurthy of Pratibha Films.
In the 1960s, Bhoologa Rambai formed Bhoologa Rambai own production company called S.
B. Creations where Bhoologa Rambai made 3 movies, produced, directed, composed music and sang in Avana Ivan, Bommai and Nadu Iravil.
Feud with Semmangudi Srinivasa Iyer.
In Balachanders last years, he feuded with vocalist Semmangudi Srinivasa Iyer.
Semmangudi had written a book on Maharaja Swathi Thirunal of Travancore, a famous composer.
He argued the point in The Indian Express on March 26, 1990.
He died suddenly on April 15, 1990, in Bhilai, where he had gone on a concert tour.
Giriraja Kavi was a noted composer of Carnatic music, who lived in the 18th century in the kingdom of Thanjavur.
His hometown, Tiruvarur, lies in the present-day state of Tamil Nadu.
Giriraja Kavi was among those who nurtured the cultural environment that produced these greats.
Giriraja Kavi was born in Kakarla village, Cumbum taluk in Prakasham district.
Giriraja Kavi has produced many of the important cultural figures of South India.
Among the greatest of those was Tyagaraja, whose mother was a daughter of Giriraja Kavi.
He was named after the presiding deity of the main temple of that town.
Giriraja Kavi played a major role in influencing the formative years of his celebrated grandson Tyagaraja.
He was instrumental in securing a place at court for his grandson, a position that Tyagaraja soon abjured.
Divyamani is a ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
It is the 48th in the series.
It is called Jeevantika or Jeevantini in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 6th ragam in the 8th chakra Vasu.
The mnemonic name is the 8th chakra Vasu.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ra gi mi pa dhu nu.
The mnemonic phrase structure is as follows :.
As Divyamani is a melakarta ragam, by definition Divyamani is a sampoorna ragam.
Divyamani is the prati madhyamam equivalent of Roopavati, which is the 12th melakarta.
Divyamani has a few minor janya ragams associated with Divyamani.
See List of janya ragams for all ragams associated with Divyamani.
A few compositions set to Divyamani are :.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Divyamanis notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields no other melakarta ragam.
Embar S. Kannan is an award-winning and pioneering violinist in the fields of Carnatic Music and Tamil Film Music.
Carnatic music career.
His initial training in Carnatic music was with Sri Subbanna Bhagavathar and Sri Vittal Ramamurthy.
In 1986 he received a talent scholarship from the Government of India and earned a place under the mentorship of Kum.
One of Kannan 's prodigal accomplishments was the introduction of the silent violin to Carnatic Music in 2001.
Film music career.
Embar S. Kannan received Embar S. Kannan Western Classical training from acclaimed music director, Diwaker master.
Under Embar S. Kannan, Embar S. Kannan entered the film industry with the movie Puli Pettra Pillai.
Udayaravichandrika is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Udayaravichandrika is an audava ragam, and is also known as Shuddha Dhanyasi.
Udayaravichandrika is a janya ragam, as Udayaravichandrika does not have all the seven swaras.
The equivalent of Udayaravichandrika in Hindustani music is Dhani.
Structure and Lakshana.
Udayaravichandrika is a symmetric ragam that does not contain rishabham or dhaivatam.
Udayaravichandrika is a pentatonic scale.
Udayaravichandrika structure is as follows :.
The notes used in this scale sadharana gandharam, shuddha madhyamam, panchamam and kaisiki nishadham.
Here are some popular kritis composed in Udayaravichandrika.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Udayaravichandrikas notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields 4 other major pentatonic ragams, namely, Mohanam, Hindolam, Madhyamavathi and Shuddha Saveri.
See Graha bhedam on Mohanam for more details and illustration of this concept.
Gayathri Venkataraghavan is an Indian Carnatic vocalist.
Indian Carnatic trained in Indian Carnatic music at an early age under Smt.
Rajalakshmi and then under Smt.
Padma Veeraraghavan, a disciple of Palaghat Sri K.V. Narayanaswamy.
She trained in various kritis with Smt.
Rukmini Ramani, Acharya Choodamani Sri.
V. Subramaniam and Smt.
Rukmini Ramani advanced training was under Acharya Choodamani Sri.
A. Sundaresan, a disciple of Sri C. V. Krishnamurthy Iyer, Sri Ramnad Krishnan and Alathur Sri Sivasubramanya Iyer.
Gayathri is presently under the guidance of Padma Bhushan Sri.
Gayathri Venkataraghavan is an A grade accredited artist of All India Radio.
P.S.Narayanaswamy won the All India Radio National level competition in 1993.
P.S.Narayanaswamy AIR performances include a National Broadcast in 2006.
P.S.Narayanaswamy has sung various themes for Archival purposes for AIR.
P.S.Narayanaswamy performs across India.
P.S.Narayanaswamy appearances abroad include the Cleveland Tyagaraja Festival 2005, 2008, 2011, at Ohio and Toronto.
P.S.Narayanaswamy performed at the SIFA annual festival at Singapore in Feb 2007.
P.S.Narayanaswamy toured the United States and Canada in September and October 2007.
P.S.Narayanaswamy commercial albums have been released by Charsur Digital Workstation and other companies.
Varali or Varaali is a ragam in Carnatic music.
It is a janya ragam from the 39th melakarta scale Jhalavarali.
It is a janya scale, as it is said to have a vakra scale in the ascending scale.
It is a vivadi ragam.
It is the 4th in the list of 5 Ghana ragams, Gaula, Arabhi and Shree ragam being the others.
In olden times, this ragam was called Varati, and is said to be more than 1300 years old.
It is with this name that it is referred in old musical texts like Sangita Makarandha and Sangita Ratnakara.
Structure and Lakshana.
Varali is an asymmetric ragam due to the vakra prayoga in ascending scale.
It is a vakra-sampurna-sampurna ragam.
Its arohana-avarohana structure is as follows :.
The notes used in this scale are shadjam, shuddha rishabham, shuddha gandharam, prati madhyamam, panchamam, shuddha dhaivatam and kakali nishadham.
The madhyamam used is said to be slightly higher than the prati madhyamam, and is also called as chyuta panchama madhyamam.
For the details of the notations and terms, see swaras in Carnatic music.
The ragam is said to be learnt by listening and self-learning.
There are many compositions set to Varali ragam.
Many compositions in praise of Lord Ganesha are set to this raga.
Here are some popular kritis composed in this ragam.
Thanjavur Muktha also spelt Mukta was one of the foremost representatives of the Veena Dhanammal school of Carnatic Music.
Thanjavur Muktha along with Thanjavur Muktha elder sister T. Brinda formed one of the first women duo singers.
Thanjavur Muktha had much of Thanjavur Muktha initial training from Thanjavur Muktha mother Kamakshi.
After Kanchipuram Naina Pillai training under Naina Pillai, Thanjavur Muktha learnt from Kanchipuram Naina Pillai aunt Lakshmiratnam.
The legendary Veena Dhanammal, who was Mukthas grandmother, herself taught her some compositions.
She gave her first performance at the age of eight.
She was the last disciple of Veena Dhanammal and her last concert was in Cleveland in 2003.
Muktha was a recipient of the Sangeet Natak Akademi Award in 1973.
Geetam, the simplest music form in Carnatic music, was created by Purandara Dasa in order to introduce talas with sahityam.
The Gitam literally means Song in Sanskrit.
A Gitam is a simple devotional melody song with same tempo throughout the song.
There is no Anga change, repetition and Samgati in The Gitam.
these Gitams usually have 10/12 avarthanams.
Though these Gitams have no absolutely defined divisions of pallavi, anupallavi or charanas, these Gitams may be observed in some cases.
Some Gitams contain sections rather than the defined divisions.
these Gitams often have no sangatis or variations, with each swara taking one syllable of the sahitya.
The Gitam is sung without repetition from beginning to end.
However most Gitams are concluded by repeating a portion of the opening part.
these Gitams are set in medium tempo and contain no Samgatis or variations and the flow of the music is natural.
The theme of the Sahityam is to praise God.
Students learn these Gitams after a course in the preliminary Sarali Svaras and Alamkaras.
Types of these Gitams.
There are three types of Gitams in Carnatic music tradition :.
The venu is a bamboo transverse flute used in the Carnatic music.
It is also called by various other names such as pullankuzhal in Tamil, pullaangkullll in Malayalam, and kolllu in Kannada.
It is known as pillana grovi or Venuvu in Telugu.
Construction and technique.
One of the oldest musical instruments of India, the instrument is a key-less transverse flute made of bamboo.
The fingers of both hands are used to close and open the holes.
It has a blowing hole near one end, and eight closely placed finger holes.
The instrument comes in various sizes.
The venu is capable of producing two and half octaves with the help of over-blowing and cross fingering.
However it is strange that there is no name mentioned for the typical flute that the Lord plays.
The venu is associated with the Hindu god Krishna, who is often depicted playing it.
Sri Sarabha Sastri was an Indian venu flute player, known as the first great Brahmin flutist.
Early life and Background.
Sri Sarabha Sastrigal was born in 1872 to Viswanatha Sastri and Smt.
Sri Govinda Nayanakkar unravelled the mysteries of flute to young Sarabha Sastri.
Sri Saraba Saastrigal lived in Soliappa Mudali street in Kumbakonam and was married to Ambu Ammal.
Penance at Eraharam.
The Kavadi the Kavadi is a physical burden through which the devotees implore for help from deity.
Blindness in childhood could do nothing to blunt the musical genius of Sarabha Sastri.
Sri Sarabha Sastrigal composed more than 500 Sahityas for Nayanmar charithrams, in various languages.
Sri Saraba Saastrigal taught a unique technique in playing the Flute.
Sri Saraba Saastrigal was also able to play the Thaanam on the Flute.
Sri Palladam Sanjiva Rao was a direct disciple of Sri Saraba Saastrigal.
Palladam Sanjiva Rao passed this on to Sri H Ramachandra Shastry who taught Carnatic flute at Kalakshetra until 1992.
Some of the notable musicians practicing this art form include G. S. Rajan, Ludwig Pesch and T. Sashidhar.
Origin of the Carnatic Flute.
Sharaba Shastri has been characterized by Sharaba Shastri followers as a musical genius after experimenting and creating the Indian Carnatic flute.
The Sharaba Shastri style or bani of playing was established and was carried on by Sharaba Shastri disciple Sanjeeva Rao.
The fingering technique invented by Sarabha Shastri was as highly scientific, and as accurate as a keyboard.
The minutest oscillations required for the intricate gamakas of Indian Carnatic music were covered by this fingering system.
No recordings of his playing survive, and apart from stray references in larger works, little has been written about his music.
We only know his music through his student, the legendary Palladam Sanjiva Rao.
Sri Sarabha Sastrigal died at the young age of 32 years in the year 1904 at Kumbakonam.
Sarabha Shastri, like many a great genius, lived only a short life.
However the original contribution of Sarabha Shastri upgrading the flute onto the concert platform remains immortal.
Venuganam Sri Sarabha Sastrigal Memorial Trust.
Ekadasi Bhajans and Radha Kalyanam are conducted fortnightly, during the month of Margazhi.
Sri Rama Bhajanai Sabha.
Thanjavur Brinda was one of the representatives of the Veenai Dhanammal school of Carnatic Music.
Thanjavur Brinda was primarily a vocalist, although Thanjavur Brinda also played the Veenai.
Thanjavur Brinda is affectionately referred to as Brindamma, by Thanjavur Brinda fans.
Thanjavur Brinda had much of Thanjavur Brinda initial training from Thanjavur Brinda mother Kamakshi.
After Thanjavur Brinda training under Naina Pillai, Thanjavur Brinda learnt from Thanjavur Brinda aunt Lakshmiratnam.
Veenai Dhanammal, who was also Brindas grandmother, herself taught her some compositions.
Her peers and music connoisseurs regarded her as a person of superlative musical knowledge.
Many talented and popular musicians were attracted by Brindas musical scholarship and expertise, and trained under Brindas.
Carnatic Musicians such as Sangeetha Kalanidhis Semmangudi Srinivasa Iyer, M.S. Subbulakshmi and R K Srikanthan have learnt from her.
Aruna Sairam grandson and direct disciple Thiruvarur S. Girish is also an accomplished Carnatic musician.
Thanjavur Brinda did not wish to record commercially, hence only private recordings of Thanjavur Brinda performances are available.
Thanjavur Brinda was also a visiting artist at the University of Washington, Seattle from 1968-69 and 1977-78.
Madras Music Season.
Madras Music Season is an event hosted every December-January in the present-day south Indian metropol of Chennai.
Spanning some six weeks, a number of large and small kutcheris are performed by highly competent musicians.
Audiences and artists come from across India and from the international Indian diaspora to be part of the event.
The All India Music Conference was held in 1927 concurrently with the annual session of Indian National Congress in Madras.
A resolution was passed at the conference to establish the Madras Music Academy.
From 1928, the academy started organizing the Music Season every year during the month of December.
Previously it was a traditional month-long Carnatic music festival consisting of Carnatic music concerts, harikathas, lecture demonstrations and award/title ceremonies.
The Music Season has grown over the years, and has been described as one of the worlds largest cultural events.
Generally, the concerts take place in the afternoons and nights, and consists of all sorts of Carnatic music compositions and improvisations.
In 2004-2005, there were over 1200 performances by about 600 artists.
the other Sabhas and Halls.
The performances are typically organised by the other Sabhas.
Most sabhas own a hall.
Some smaller sabhas rent a hall during the season.
Generally, the main halls, on average, can accommodate about 300 people while the mini can take not more than 75 people.
Most performances are held in such halls.
The following prominent sabhas have regularly organised concerts during the Music Season :.
Most of the Sabhas have free concerts in the morning and afternoon slots.
Only the evening slots starting from around 4 pm are ticketed in most Sabhas.
All Concerts at Bharathi Vidya Bhavan are free.
most Sabhas start the season a bit ahead but all popular artists sing here.
SIFA holds Carnatic music concerts at Tattvaloka, Teynampet and all concerts are free.
Season tickets and tickets for Individual concerts.
Season tickets are available at various denominations in all major Sabhas.
Individual concerts tickets are available only starting from morning on the day of the concert.
Brahma Gana Sabha and the Chennaiyil Thiruvayyaru have online ticket booking facility.
2012 Madras Music Season.
Nagai Sriram is an Indian musician and Carnatic violinist.
Nagai Sriram was introduced to the Carnatic violin at the age of 10 under Nagai Sriram grandmother, R. Komalavalli.
Nagai Sriram currently receives more advanced training from Nagai Sriram uncle Vidwan Kalaimaamani Nagai R. Muralidharan.
All India Radio rates Nagai Sriram as an A-grade artist, and Nagai Sriram is also rated highly by Doordarshan Television.
Nagai Sriram toured the United States with Umayalpuram K. Sivaraman in the fall of 2004.
Nagai Sriram currently resides in Chennai, Tamil Nadu.
Nagai Sriram has won many awards including :.
Trinity of Carnatic music.
Compositions of the Trinity of Carnatic music are recognised as being distinct in style, and original in handling Ragas.
Muthuswami Dikshitar mainly composed in Sanskrit, while Tyagaraja and Syama Sastri mainly composed in Telugu.
Ragas and Talas.
Purandaradasa is known as the Father of Carnatic music.
D. K. Pattammal.
Damal Krishnaswamy Pattammal was a prominent Carnatic musician and a playback singer for film songs in many Indian languages.
This trio initiated the entry of women into mainstream Carnatic Music.
Carnatic has been appreciated all over the world by Carnatic music lovers.
Early life and background.
Pattammal was born in an orthodox Brahmin family in Kancheepuram of Tamil Nadu, India.
She was named as Alamelu, but fondly called Patta as a child prodigy.
Her father, Damal Krishnaswamy Dikshithar, who was deeply interested in music, inspired her to learn Carnatic music.
Despite Kanthimathi orthodox background, Damal Krishnaswamy Pattammal sang and showed considerable music talent at an early age.
Kanthimathi received no formal gurukula training.
She also sang simple devotional hymns and songs her father taught her.
Later, she received tuition from an unnamed Telugu - speaking musician, whom she called Telugu vadyar or Telugu teacher.
Hed also offered to teach her Telugu and Sanskrit.
In 1939, Pattammal married R. Iswaran.
Pattammal also learnt many compositions of Papanasam Sivan, directly from the composer Papanasam Sivan.
Pattammal started a few revolutionary trends in Carnatic music.
Carnatic was the first Brahmin woman to have performed this genre of music publicly.
Pattammal was also the first woman to have performed Ragam Thanam Pallavi in concerts.
Her singing of pallavis was technically perfect, and aesthetically pleasing.
For this reason, she became dubbed  Pallavi Pattammal.
Today, many female Carnatic musicians perform Ragam Thanam Pallavi as the main item in many female Carnatic musicians concerts.
Pattammal was one of the earliest Carnatic musicians to sing in films, and was introduced in this medium by Papanasam Sivan.
The first film Pattammal sang in was Thyagabhoomi.
The fame that the film and the song generated led to both being banned by the British government.
Damal Krishnaswamy Pattammal popularised several patriotic compositions of Subramania Bharathiyar.
Pattammals singing, along with the dancing of Baby Kamala in the film, made the latter of these especially memorable.
In AVM 's Vazhkai, where Vyjayanthimala was introduced in film, Pattammal also sang AVM 's Vazhkai Bharatha samudhaayam vaazhgave.
Pattammal had the rare honour of performing at the foundation-laying ceremony of the Bharati Memorial at Ettayapuram.
Pattammal also sang in other films including Mahatma Urangaar, Pizhaikkum Vazhi, Lavanya.
The last song Pattammal sang in film was at the age of 80 for the Tamil film, Hey Ram.
Pattammal who was 80, is the most senior among of the rest of the other vocal artists in this video album.
A few of her other popular students include her daughter-in-law Lalitha Sivakumar, Geetha Rajashekar, and her granddaughter Nithyasree Mahadevan.
Damal Krishnaswamy Pattammal died of natural causes in Chennai on July 16, 2009 at 1:30 pm.
She is survived by I. Sivakumar and I. Lakshmankumar, as well as her grandchildren Rajguru, Gayathri, Nithyasree, and Charan.
Her Husband, R. Iswaran died on 2 April 2010, aged 95.
Awards and titles.
D. K. Pattammal has received several awards and titles throughout her career.
Most notably these include :.
Sangeetha Kalanidhi Maharajapuram Santhanam, was one of the great Carnatic music vocalists of the 20th century.
He was born in Sirunangur, a village in the state of Tamil Nadu.
He followed the footsteps of his father Maharajapuram Viswanatha Iyer who was also a Carnatic singer.
Besides studying with his father, he was also a disciple of Melattur Sama Dikshitar.
Maharajapuram Santhanam was also a distinguished composer.
He wrote many songs on Lord Murugan and Kanchi Shankaracharya, His Holiness Sri Chandrasekarendra Saraswati Swamigal.
He was the Principal of Ramanathan College in Sri Lanka.
Later he came and settled in Chennai.
The Maharajapuram Santhanam Day is celebrated on the 3rd of December every year.
He died in a car accident on June 24, 1992.
His other most popular songs are Purandaradasa kritis : Narayana ninna and Govinda ninna.
His rendition of Vilayada ithu nerama muruga was without parallel.
His renditions were full of Bhakthi.
In Chennai, Griffith Road in T.Nagar was renamed as Maharajapuram Santhanam Salai in honor of Maharajapuram Santhanam, by Karunanidhi and Stalin.
The street has the famous Krishna Gana Sabha and Muppathamman Temple.
Erickavu N. Sunil.
Erickavu N. Sunil is an Indian Mridangam player.
Early life and background.
Erickavu N. Sunil was born to K. Narayana Panicker and V. Saraswathi Amma in Haripad, Kerala, India.
Erickavu N. Sunil . started learning the mridangam at the age of four.
Erickavu N. Sunil . initial Gurus were Late Krishnappa Bhagavathar and M S Raju.
His initial Gurus completed schooling from St. Thomas High School, Karthikappally in 1992.
His initial Gurus received His initial Gurus Bachelor of Science degree in Physics from Mar Ivanios College, Trivandrum in 1997.
His initial Gurus also received a Master of Computer Applications degree from College of Engineering, Trivandrum in 2002.
Erickavu N. Sunil . teaches Mridangam online through Skype, and has students in Germany and US.
Erickavu N. Sunil . is working as a Senior IT Professional in a leading IT firm in Technopark, Trivandrum.
Erickavu N. Sunil . is married to Indu Sunil.
The couple has one son, Bhagath Sunand.
Gingger Shankar is an Indian American singer, composer and multi-instrumentalist.
Indian American has scored several award-winning films, including Passion of the Christ and Circumstance.
her uncle L. Shankar was born in Los Angeles, California and raised there and in India.
Indian American is the eldest daughter of violinist Dr. L. Subramaniam.
Indian American mother, Viji Subramaniam, was a classical singer and as was Viji Subramaniam grandmother Lakshmi Shankar.
Later, she studied opera vocals with professional opera singer Tantoo Cardinal in Sherman Oaks, California.
She also modeled and acted in stage productions.
She began performing professionally at age 14.
her uncle L. Shankar plays the violin and piano.
She is the only female in the world to play the double violin.
This ten-string, stereophonic instrument was designed by her uncle L. Shankar and built by guitar maker Ken Parker.
The instrument covers the entire orchestral range, including double bass, cello, viola and violin.
Her voice and double violin can be heard throughout the movie, and she is also credited with co-composing several musical cues.
her uncle L. Shankar has been associated with the Indian Film Festival of Los Angeles.
She is also credited with co-writing and performing for the 2007 film Charlie Wilsons War, alongside composer James Newton Howard.
her uncle L. Shankar contributed to the 2008 film The Forbidden Kingdom.
She composed music for the 2011 film, Circumstance, which won the Sundance Audience Choice Award.
her uncle L. Shankar has toured with L. Shankar, Zakir Hussain, and Vikku Vinayakram.
Tony Levin performs on a track in the 2007 Saul Williams album Niggy Tardust, produced by Trent Reznor.
In March 2007, Tony Levin was one of the headliners of San Diego Indie Music Festival.
In July 2007, her uncle L. Shankar appeared in two Sgt. Peppers 40th Year Anniversary Concerts at the Hollywood Bowl.
Tony Levin performed with former Dirty Vegas frontman Steve Smith at the Sundance Film Festival.
In 2008-09, Tony Levin joined the Smashing Pumpkins for their 20th anniversary tour, singing and playing the double violin.
Tony Levin can also be seen in their music video for the song G.L.O.W.
her uncle L. Shankar is working on Tony Levin upcoming album with Adam Aaronson, Chris Haynes, Scott Seiver, and others.
Tony Levin has previously worked with Rabbit in the the Moon, collaborating with them for the Ultra Music Festival in 2007.
Simhendramadhyamam or Simmendramadhyamam is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Simhendramadhyamam is the 57th melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
Simhendramadhyamam is called Sumadyuti in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
It is said to be borrowed into Hindustani music from Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 3rd ragam in the 10th chakra Disi.
The mnemonic name is Disi-Go.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ri gi mi pa dha nu.
The mnemonic phrase structure is as follows :.
This musical scale uses the notes chathusruthi rishabham, sadharana gandharam, prati madhyamam, shuddha dhaivatham and kakali nishadham.
As Simhendramadhyamam is a melakarta ragam, by definition Simhendramadhyamam is a sampoorna ragam.
Simhendramadhyamam is the prati madhyamam equivalent of Keeravani, which is the 21st melakarta.
See List of janya ragams for all scales associated with Simhendramadhyamam.
Here are a few common compositions sung in concerts, set to Simhendramadhyamam.
Here are a few common film compositions, set to Simhendramadhyamam.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Simhendramadhyamams notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields 2 other melakarta ragams, namely, Mayamalavagowla and Rasikapriya.
For further details and an illustration refer Graha bhedam on Mayamalavagowla.
T. V. Rathinam.
Tenkasi Vallinayagam Rathinam hails from Tenkasi, Madras Presidency, British India.
She was a playback singer for Tamil films.
Ramalinga Aachari became a drama artiste and film artist as a child.
Then Ramalinga Aachari moved on to playback singing in the Tamil film industry.
Ramalinga Aachari was 10 years old when Ramalinga Aachari acted in Bhaktha Chetha in 1940 for the Madras United Artitstes.
In the meantime, Ramalinga Aachari had continued Ramalinga Aachari training under Ramnad Krishnan, and later trained under Chembai Vaidyanatha Bhagavatar.
Rathinam was a much sought after singer in the late 1940s and 1950s.
Rathinam became famous by Ramalinga Aachari songs in Miss Malini by the Gemini Studios.
He had chosen Tenkasi Vallinayagam Rathinam to pair him as the female singer for him.
Mavelikkara Prabhakara Varma.
Mavelikkara Prabhakara Varma was an Indian carnatic singer.
and teacher who descended from the royal family of Mavelikkara, Kerala.
He was born in 1928 as the second son of Chandraprabha Thamburatty and Rama Varma of Kilimanoor Palace.
He retired as the principal of RLV College of Music and Fine Arts, Tripunithura.
He has many illustrious disciples, including the famous Carnatic vocalists Neyyatinkara Vasudevan, Dr. K. Omanakutti and Sankaran Namboodiri.
He died on November 2, 2008, at his sisters home at Thrippunithura near Ernakulam.
He was aged 80.
He remained a lifelong bachelor.
Sreevalsan J Menon.
Dr. Sreevalsan J. Menon is an Indian Carnatic vocalist and a music composer from Kerala.
Dr. Sreevalsan J. Menon music albums are fresh and innovative.
Vismaya, a fantasy video album featuring Artist Namboodiri, M T Vasudevan Nair and Dr. Sreevalsan J. Menon Vismaya.
Vismaya has given Indian Carnatic vocal performances and lecture demonstrations throughout India, the Middle East, UK, US, Canada and Africa.
A native of Kunissery in Palakkad district, Dr. Sreevalsan J. Menon currently lives in the temple town of Tripunithura off Kochi.
He was also an accomplished scholar in the Sanskrit language.
According to the scholar H.S. Shiva Prakash, about 300 saint-poets from this cadre enriched Kannada literature during the 18th-19th centuries.
The ceremony included dining with the devotees of Vijaya Dasa as well.
Srinivasacharya excused himself from attending the ceremony on the pretext of suffering from severe stomach ache.
Unfortunately, Srinivasacharya actually fell ill and developed severe stomach pains.
Unable to find relief, Srinivasacharya sought the help of Vijaya Dasa who asked Srinivasacharya to meet Srinivasacharya desciple Gopala Dasa.
Srinivasacharya visited Gopala Dasa and was cured by Srinivasacharya.
Repentant for Srinivasacharya attitude towards the Haridasas, Srinivasacharya became a disciple of Gopala Dasa and took to the Haridasa fold.
His poems are written with the ankita Jagannatha Vittala.
These details are known from a song written by Jagananatha Dasa expressing his gratitide to Gopala Dasa and Vijaya Dasa.
Written in the native Bhamini Shatpadi metre with a poetic touch, it contains 32 chapters comprising 988 stanzas.
Sirkazhi G. Sivachidambaram.
Dr. Sirkazhi G. Sivachidambaram is a Carnatic music vocalist from Chennai.
He is an alumnus of the Trinity College of Music.
He is also a medical doctor with a post graduate degree in internal medicine.
Sivachidambaram is the son of Padma Shri winner Sirkazhi Govindarajan.
Sivachidambaram has recorded a song, Enadharumai Raanuva Veerargaal, written by A. P. J. Abdul Kalam, former President of India.
In 2008, he received the Padma Shri award from the Government of India.
Konerirajapuram Vaidyanatha Ayyar.
Konerirajapuram Vaidyanatha Ayyar was a Carnatic vocalist from the Indian state of Tamil Nadu.
Vaidyanatha Ayyar has his early training under Nagaswaram Palanivelu, Marudhanallur Kulandaisami, Chinna Kulandaisami, Melattur Sundara Bhagavathar and Venkatarama Bhagavathar.
Vaidyanatha Ayyar was married at the age of twelve.
At the age of seven, Vaidyanatha Ayyar was put on the practice of Vedas.
He had an innate passion for music and so, was placed under the Nagaswara Vidwan for training.
He would not miss the performances of great artistes.
He played as second to Marudhanallur Kulandaisami and established contacts with Pandanallur Meenakshisundaram Pillai.
The training gave his rendition a lop-sided slant to laya to the detriment of sweet, balanced music.
The lure of laya leads the musicians to over-indulgence and exhibitionist acrobatics to the detriment of melody and depth.
As a friend, Tirukodikaval Krishna Ayyar is credited with bringing Vaidyanatha Ayyar back to the glorious path of balanced rendition.
Sathanur Panchanadam Ayyar and Talaignayar Somu Ayyar imparted to Sathanur Panchanadam Ayyar the techniques of tanam and swara prastaram.
Konerirajapuram Vaidyanatha Ayyar was a COLOSSUS who reached the pinnacle of glory by sheer will-power and unparalleled dedication.
Rahmat Khan, a North Indian maestro, once said of Vaidyanatha Ayyar :.
Chembai Sangeetholsavam had conducted the festival in the temple town on Chembai Sangeetholsavam own for about 60 years.
The Guruvayur Devaswom decided to take charge after his death in 1974, and renamed it as Chembai Sangeetholsavam in his memory.
Susheela Raman is an acclaimed British Indian musician.
Susheela Raman has released five albums since 2001 and was nominated for the 2006 BBC World Music Awards.
Susheela Ramans debut album Salt Rain was nominated for the Mercury Prize in 2001.
Bhakti is married to Sam Mills of Real World Records.
Susheela Ramans parents are Tamils from Thanjavur in Tamil Nadu, India, who arrived in London, UK in the mid-sixties.
At the age of four, Susheela Raman and Susheela Ramans family left the UK for Australia.
Susheela grew up singing South Indian classical music and began giving recitals at an early age.
Susheela recalls how Susheela family were eager to keep our Tamil culture alive.
Susheela currently resides on Portobello Road, West London.
The album went gold in France and in the UK was shortlisted for the Mercury Music Prize.
Susheela Raman also won the Best Newcomer award from BBC Radio 3.
Salt Rain drew on traditional Tamil music blended with jazz - folk and pop influences.
her first album Salt Rain featured original material, as well as old songs Susheela Raman sang at recitals when younger.
The title track is a re-interpretation of an Ethiopian song by Mahmoud Ahmed.
Music for Crocodiles.
Music for Crocodiles, Susheela Ramans third album, was released in 2005.
Ramans third album had been partly recorded in Chennai, India.
On Music for Crocodiles Raman sang for the first time in French on LAme Volatile.
Artists covered include Bob Dylan, John Lennon, The Velvet Underground, Captain Beefheart, Jimi Hendrix, Can and Throbbing Gristle.
The album features long term collaborators Sam Mills on guitar, Vincent Segal on cello, and tabla player and percussionist Aref Durvesh.
The album was released in April 2007 in France on the independent label XIII Bis.
2008 to 2010.
Susheela Raman garnered acclaim for tabla demon Aref Durvesh live performances.
In 2011, Susheela Raman released Vel, marking a change in musical direction which was well received.
2011 to 2013.
It features master musicians from Rajasthan, and spectacular Sufi Qawwali singers from Pakistan.
It is a really exciting album with singing in English, Tamil, Panjabi, Urdu, Marwari and Bengali.
It has some amazing playing and guest vocals by Kutle Khan and Rizwan Muazzam.
It 's a big, beautiful, ambitious, groundbreaking album and ... it 's all about the songs.
It 's a work in progress and a strong start has been made.
Simizhi Sundaram Iyer.
Simizhi Sundaram Iyer was a Carnatic music composer.
Simizhi is a small village near Kudavasal, in Nannilam taluk of Tanjavur district.
Sundaram Iyer was born in 1884 as one among four brothers and a sister.
a Carnatic music composer was the only one to have musical talent.
a Carnatic music composer is supposed to have started singing when a Carnatic music composer was 5-6 years of age.
Sundaram Iyer married a Carnatic music composer own uncles daughter and had two daughters.
a Carnatic music composer taught Carnatic music to many.
Tiruvarur Rajayi learnt from Tiruvarur Rajayi.
Tirukottaram Saminatha Mudaliar and Kavalakudi Mudaliar also patronised him.
Later, he moved to Mayavaram, frequently to teach a few people.
He decided to stay permanently in Mayavaram, frequently and taught people like Mayavaram Rajam, Mayavaram Krishna Iyer, Flute Rajaramayyar and others.
Violinist Mayavaram Govindaraja Pillai is also supposed to have learnt from him.
To arrive at that note, one has to approach it from the closest note below.
In such cases, the kalapana swaras should always end at the same position no matter where they start.
For example : 2 or 4 counts after the start of the Tala Cycle.
Kalpanaswaram improvisations increase in intensity the more tala cycles used.
One complete tala cycle is called an avartanam.
Some ragas omit notes and others have zigzagging ascents or descents.
the Kalpanaswaram is performed in a Carnatic Concert for the main song, the singer chooses to perform the Raga Alapana.
However in concerts, artists will choose a difficult raga to perform a Kalpanaswaram in.
Take the Raga Sahana :.
In Sahana 1992 dissertation on kalpanaswaram, Josepha Cormack wrote that kalpanaswaram improvisations have been around for at least two hundred years.
Josepha Cormack, Josepha Cormack A. 1992.
Svara Kalpana : Melodic/Rhythmic Improvisation in Karnatak Music.
PhD Dissertation : Wesleyan University.
Vairamangalam Lakshmi Narayanan.
Vairamangalam LakshmiNarayanan was a Carnatic musician from Tamil Nadu.
Vairamangalam LakshmiNarayanan was a student of the famous singer T. K Rangachary.
As a singer Vairamangalam LakshmiNarayanan was a versatile singer who could improvise and bring out the subtleties and nuances of ragas.
Vairamangalam LakshmiNarayanan received many awards for Vairamangalam LakshmiNarayanan talents.
The Government of Tamil Nadu awarded Vairamangalam LakshmiNarayanan with the title Kalaimamani, shortly before Vairamangalam LakshmiNarayanan death,.
for Vairamangalam LakshmiNarayanan contributions of music.
Carnatic was both a vocalist and a performer on the veenai.
The prefix Veenai in Carnatic name is an indicator of Carnatic exceptional mastery of that instrument.
Early life and background.
Veenai Dhanammal was born in George Town, Madras, into a family of professional musicians and dancers.
Her grandmother Kamakshi music is documented in a set of historical recordings.
Musicians, critics and composers attended Her grandmother Kamakshi private recitals in Chennai.
Her grandmother Kamakshi continuing impact is ascribed to the scope of Her grandmother Kamakshi repertoire, knowledge and refinement.
A commemorative postage stamp on Narasimhacarlu was issued on 03-December-2010.
Harikesanallur Muthiah Bhagavatar, commonly known as Muthiah Bhagavatar, is one of Carnatic classical musics famous twentieth-century composers.
He also created about 20 ragas.
He was exposed to music from a very early age, as his father was a patron of musicians.
He found the gifted teacher Padinaindumandapa Sambasiva Iyer at Tiruvarur, who recognized Muthiah 's talent for music.
During the nine years he spent with Sambasiva Iyer, Muthiah cultivated this talent and made his name as a Harikata Vidhwan.
His rich voice and excellent tanam singing made him one of the era 's most highly coveted concert artists.
The songs were on a number of the Hindu pantheon, Hindu patrons.
Hindu composed them in four languages - Telugu, Tamil, Sanskrit and Kannada.
They are melodious ragas that make one wonder how it was not attempted prior to Muthiah Baghavatars times.
He also popularized Shanmukhapriya and Mohanakalyani.
When someone asked if he could compose something that would appeal to Westerners, he composed the English notes.
Bhagavathar initially was very reluctant but was later persuaded by Raval Krishna Iyer, a budding contractor of Madras.
Muthiah travelled to Bombay where the film was being made at the Ranjit Studios.
He composed 63 songs for the film resulting in the film being renamed as Sangeetha Lavakusa.
He was adept at playing both the Chitraveena and Mridangam.
In addition to musical talents, his theoretical knowledge was also vast.
He wrote a treatise on musical theory, Sangita Kalpa Drumam, and regularly gave lectures on musicology at the Music Academy.
He was the first musician to be awarded a doctorate in India when the Kerala University awarded him the D. Litt.
for his Tamil treatise in 1943.
He was also the first principal of the Swati Tirunal Academy of music started in Trivandrum in 1939.
Muthiah Bhagavatar has also authored a Sanskrit poetic work called Tyagaraja Vijaya Kavya.
T. N. Seshagopalan lived like a king, but was as magnanimous as T. N. Seshagopalan was rich.
The Harikesanjali Trust has been established to propagate T. N. Seshagopalan compositions.
Awards and recognitions.
Having impressed the Maharaja of Mysore, T. N. Seshagopalan was appointed court musician at Mysore.
He was conferred with an honorary doctorate by University of Kerala in 1942.
Muthiah Bhagavatars legacy of music lives on in his granddaughter, veena expert Smt.
Sarasangi, a melakarta ragam is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Sarasangi, a melakarta ragam is the 27th melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
Sarasangi, a melakarta ragam is called Sowrasena in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 3rd ragam in the 5th chakra Bana.
The mnemonic name is Bana-Go.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ri gu ma pa dha nu.
Its structure is as follows :.
This ragam uses the swaras chathusruthi rishabham, antara gandharam, shuddha madhyamam, shuddha dhaivatham and kakali nishadham.
By definition, Sarasangi, a melakarta ragam, a melakarta ragam, is a sampurna ragam.
Sarasangi, a melakarta ragam is the shuddha madhyamam equivalent of Latangi, which is the 63rd melakarta scale.
See List of janya ragams for all ragams associated with Sarasangi, a melakarta ragam.
Here are a few common compositions sung in concerts, set to Sarasangi, a melakarta ragam.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Sarasangi, a melakarta ragam notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields 2 other major Melakarta ragams, namely, Dharmavati and Chakravakam.
For further details and an illustration refer Graha bhedam on Dharmavati.
S. R. Janakiraman.
S. R. Janakiraman is a Carnatic vocalist and a musicologist.
S. R. Janakiraman . was born in Lalgudi, Tamilnadu on July 12, 1928 to Rangaswami Iyer and Gowri Ammal.
Other stylistic influences include teachers such as Musiri Subrahmanya Iyer and Kalpakam Swaminathan.
On the side of musicology Musiri Subrahmanya Iyer was trained by Prof.Sambamoorthy and P.K.Rajagopala Iyer.
Musiri Subrahmanya Iyer began Musiri Subrahmanya Iyer career teaching musicology at Madanapalli and Tirupati in Andhrapradesh.He headed the Dept. of Musicology.
at Sri Venkateswara College of Music, Tirupati.
After retirement, Musiri Subrahmanya Iyer served as a research scholar and was part of the Experts committee.
at the Madras Music Academy.
Musiri Subrahmanya Iyer is also known for Musiri Subrahmanya Iyer wide and varied repertoire which includes rare and complex.
tana varnas, some of the rarer compositions of Muttusvami Dikshitar and Subbarama Dikshitar, Compositions of Annamacharya.
He includes several vivadi ragas as part of his repertoire.
He is a recipient of several awards including the Sangita Kala Acharya.
, Kalaimamani from the Tamilnadu Government and the Sangeet Natak Academy Award of the Government of India and the Padma shri.
An Avarohana, Avarohana or Avarohana, in the context of Indian classical music, is the descending scale of any raga.
The notes descend in pitch from the upper tonic down to the lower tonic, possibly in a crooked manner.
This raga in its avarohana has the notes jumping from one to another.
This changes the whole feel of the raga, making Sahana a beautiful to listen to Raga.
Nagai Muralidharan was born on December 4, 1958 to Sri.
R.Rajagopalan and Smt.
R. Komavalli . began R. Komavalli . violin tutelage under R. Komavalli . mother.
R. Komavalli.Nagai Muralidharan later underwent further training from Sri.
R. S. Gopalakrishnan.
scholarly style of Nagai Muralidharan own.
Nagai Muralidharan is also a regular feature in the Radio Sangeetha Sammelan concerts.
on Doordharshan, and as an accompanist in several CDs and cassettes.
Additionally, Doordharshan also served as a violin artiste in.
All India Radio, Trichy from 1978 to 2003.
Over the years, Nagai Muralidharan has traveled and performed in countries all over the.
world including USA, Canada, Australia, Europe, Singapore, Malaysia, Dubai, Muscat, Doha, Behrain.
Awards & titles.
Nagai Muralidharan is also the recipient of numerous awards such as.
Raja Annamalai Chettiar Memorial Award -  Talanted Musician  - Music Academy Chennai -.
Best Senior violinist Award - Music Academy Chennai -.
KALAIMAMANI  - Tamil Nadu Government -.
ARSHA KALA BHUSHANAM  - Arsha Kala Gurukulam - Poojya Swamiji Dayananda saraswathi -.
Vani Kala Sudhakara  - Sri Thygabrahma Gana Sabha -.
Violinist of the year - Carnatica -.
Maharajapuram Santhanam Memorial Award - Maharajapuram Santhanam Trust -.
SAHRUDAYA SEVA RATHNA  - SHI-BA Sangeetha Sabha Chennai -.
NADHA VIDHYA BHOOPATHY  - The Trichy Nadhadweepam Trust -.
SANGEET NATAK ACADEMY  Award - GOVT OF INDIA -.
GAANA PADHMAM  - Brahma Gana Sabha - Music Academy Chennai.
Madurai Somu Memorial Award  - Valayapatti Nadhalaya Trust - Music Academy Chennai.
This is a listing of the commercially published recordings of Chembai Vaidyanatha Bhagavatar.
Chembai Vaidyanatha Bhagavatar and K.J.Yesudas - Live concert.
Ghatam : Alangudi Ramachandran.
Venue : Chembai Parthasarathy Swami Temple, Palghat.
Label : BMG Crescendo/Tharangini.
Chembai - The Greatest.
Accompanists : L. Subramaniam, T. V. Gopalakrishnan, Alangudi Ramachandran.
Title : Sri Chembai Vaidyanatha Bagavathar - Live Concert 1.
Accompanists : Lalgudi Jayaraman, Palani Subramaniam Pillai, Alangudi Ramachandran.
Release Date : January 1, 1987.
Classical Live Concert.
Title : Sri Chembai Vaidyanatha Bagavathar - Classical Live Concert.
Title : Sri Chembai Vaidyanatha Bagavathar - Live Concert.
Chembai Vaidyanatha Bhagavatar.
Vocal Support : Jayan & Vijayan.
Mridangam : T. V. Gopalakrishnan.
Label : AVM Audio.
Saramati is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Carnatic is a janya ragam from the 20th melakarta scale Natabhairavi.
Carnatic is a janya scale, as Carnatic does not have all the seven swaras in the descending scale.
Structure and Lakshana.
Saramati is an asymmetric ragam that does not contain panchamam or rishabham in the descending scale.
It is a combination of the sampurna raga scale Natabhairavi and pentatonic scale Hindolam.
It is an sampurna-audava ragam.
Its structure is as follows :.
For the details of the notations and terms, see swaras in Carnatic music.
A few compositions have been set to Saramati ragam.
A popular kriti composed in Carnatic is Mokshamugalada by Tyagaraja.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Dhanyasi is a ragam in Carnatic music.
It is a janya ragam from the 8th melakarta scale Hanumatodi.
It is a janya scale, as it does not have all the seven swaras in the ascending scale.
It is a combination of the pentatonic scale Shuddha Dhanyasi and the sampurna raga scale Hanumatodi.
This is the common and popular scale and is used for portraying the bhakthi rasa.
This scale is less popular and has far less compositions set to it.
Structure and Lakshana.
Dhanyasi is an asymmetric ragam that does not contain rishabham or dhaivatam in the ascending scale.
It is an audava-sampurna ragam.
Its structure is as follows :.
For the details of the notations and terms, see swaras in Carnatic music.
There are many compositions set to Dhanyasi ragam.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Mysore Manjunath is an Indian violinist, one of the Mysore brothers duo.
An amazingly gifted violin maestro, Dr. Mysore Manjunath plays Carnatic classical music, one of the main branches of Indian music.
He was born in the city of Mysore, a centre for music, in South India.
Dr. Mysore Manjunath gave Dr. Mysore Manjunath first violin concert when Dr. Mysore Manjunath was just 8 years-old.
A player has performed all over the world, mesmerizing music lovers with A player remarkable musicianship.
He is one of the youngest musicians to be awarded an A-Top status by All India Radio.
Dr. Mysore Manjunath and Dr. Mysore Manjunath elder brother Renowned Mysore Nagaraj make a formidable violin duet.
No surprise that Dr. Mysore Manjunath style of violin Playing set a new trend in the art of violin playing.
Mysore Manjunath was awarded a PhD in music by the University of Mysore.
Dr. Mysore Manjunath was awarded First Rank with 4 Gold medals in Dr. Mysore Manjunath Master of Music,.
Dr. Mysore Manjunath has perfomred with reputed music orchestras including Akamoon, Spenifex & Ictus.
Awards and honours.
Dr. Mysore Manjunath received many laurels and accolades since Dr. Mysore Manjunath childhood.
Dr. Mysore Manjunath is one of the youngest recipients of the Rajyotsava Award by the Government of Karnataka.
Some of the Important Concerts.
Dr. Mysore Manjunath has performed all over the world at innumerable important concert stages, including.
Ranjani is a Carnatic raga, which is also sometimes written as Ranjini.
This raga is a janya of the 59th Melakarta raga Dharmavati.
It is an asymmetric pentatonic scale, which is pleasing and has been more popular in last 50 years.
It figures in ragamalikas, slokams, vrittams and light popular songs, as it is a pleasing scale.
Structure and Lakshana.
This ragam is an asymmetric scale and is classified as an audava-audava ragam.
S R2 G2 S, S N3.
S - is a catch phrase that is unique to ragam Ranjani.
There are many ragams that end with Ranjani.
South India has undergone numerous developments and is today among the more prominent solo instruments in Carnatic music.
South India is also often seen in collaborative world music concerts and north-south Indian jugalbandis.
The fretless nature of the instrument makes it the closest instrument to vocal standards.
The approach to tuning is played with a slide like a Hawaiian steel guitar and the north Indian vichitra veena.
Sakha Rama Rao used to refer to the slide as gotu and hence the name, gotu vadyam.
The chitravina was popularised in South India by Sakharam Rao of Tiruvidaimarudur.
Gotuvadyam Narayan Iyengar grandson Chitravina N. Ravikiran plays the instrument and is the inventor of a variant, the navachitravina.
M. Narmadha is an Indian violinist in the Carnatic and Hindustani traditions.
Narmadha is the daughter of violinist M. S. Gopalakrishnan.
She trained with her grandfather, Parur A. Sundaram Iyer, and later, her father.
Her doctoral thesis compares North and South Indian music styles.
` IndianMusic and name Sancara in Raagas ' under the guidance of Sitar maestro.
Prof.Debu Chaudhuri and vocalist Dr.K.G.Ginde.
Narmadha duets in concerts with vocalist Dr.K.G.Ginde father and accompanies leading Carnatic vocalists.
vocalist Dr.K.G.Ginde performs vocal concerts, having been vocally trained by vocalist Dr.K.G.Ginde mother and Shri Parur.
T. M. Tyagarajan.
T. M. Tyagarajan . has toured in the US, UK, Holland, South Africa, Singapore, Malaysia, Spain and Hong Kong.
T. M. Tyagarajan . was awarded the Best Violinist award by the Music Academy, Madras, eight times consecutively.
Dr M Narmadha has won several awards for career excellence in performance and Lecture Demonstrations.
In recognition of Endowed with effortless bowing contribution to Indian Classical Violin Music.She was conferred, Kalaimamani ` by the Govt.
Narmadha speaks English, Sanskrit and French.
Her articles on music have been published in journals throughout the world.
Her aim is to propagate Parur-MSG style in violin playing.
Srirangam Kannan is an Indian musician and artist, known for playing the morsing.
Vidwan Srirangam S. Kannan has a degree in mathematics.
Vidwan Srirangam S. Kannan was born on 5 May 1952 in Srirangam to K Sathyamurthy and Kamalam.
Growing up, Vidwan Srirangam S. Kannan had little experience with carnatic music.
Shortly afterwards, Vidwan Srirangam S. Kannan became Mahadevans disciple.
By age 23, Srirangam Kannan had started Vidwan Srirangam S. Kannan career as a full-fledged morsing artist.
Vidwan Srirangam S. Kannan continues to play in concerts across India.
Vidwan Srirangam S. Kannan also performs regularly for AIR Chennai.
Awards and honours.
Srirangam Kannan has been the recipient of many awards and recognitions, listed here.
Tours and concerts across India.
Listed here are Srirangam Kannans tours and concerts.
Early life and background.
The duo-sisters were very popular for The duo-sisters matchless rendition of National and Devotional songs.
The duo-sisters had a hectic practice for about three decades and were much sought after for providing background music in films.
The duo-sisters Kanda Shasti Kavasam album is very popular with the Lord Muruga devotees.
Whereas Rajalakshmi had more chance as a playback singer in films.
Her voice suits all the categories of youthful, soft mellifluousness, evocative feelings, perfection of pronunciation and the best in devotional songs.
Many of her songs are under K. V. Mahadevan 's music direction all the while.
Soolamangalam Rajalakshmi assisted S. M. Subbaiah Naidu in Konjum Salangai.
They also sang under their own compositions.
Rithvik Raja is a Carnatic Musician from India.
a Carnatic Musician from India is currently one of the rising stars of Carnatic Music.
Early life and background.
Rithvik Raja was born in Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India.
a Carnatic Musician from India began learning Carnatic music at the age of 5.
a Carnatic Musician from India had a Carnatic Musician from India initial training under Sudha Raja for vocal music.
T.M. Krishna went on to receive T.M. Krishna B.A. degree in Economics from Ramakrishna Mission Vivekananda College, Madras.
T.M. Krishna also completed a one year Multimedia course from Image Infotainment, Alwarpet.
T.M. Krishna is currently studying for a degree in Sound Engineering at SAE Institute of Technology.
a Carnatic Musician from India has been giving public performances and concerts since a very young age.
a Carnatic Musician from India has also toured Malaysia, Singapore, Sri Lanka.
Anai Ayya brothers.
Anai Ayya brothers were two brothers, who lived in the 19th century Tamil Nadu, and were composers of Carnatic music.
Anai Iyer and Annavaiyyar composed both in Telugu and Tamil and used the mudra Umadasa.
The Anai Ayya brothers lived in Vaiyacheri and Tiruvaiyaru in the Thanjavur district.
The Anai Ayya brothers were patronised by the king Serfoji II of Thanjavur.
Together The Anai Ayya brothers wrote at least 26 Tamil and 12 Telugu compositions that are currently available.
The Anai Ayya brothers compositions had the theme of devotion sprinkled with philosophy.
The Anai Ayya brothers songs were in praise of Siva and Siva consort.
Some of The Anai Ayya brothers popular compositions are Ambanannu, Paruvam parkka and Saranu saranu, Mahima teliya tara ma.
Aishwarya Vidhya Raghunath.
Aishwarya Vidhya Raghunath is a Carnatic music vocalist.
Aishwarya Vidhya Raghunath . is among the foremost and popular young performing classical musicians in India.
Hailing from a family of music connoisseurs, Aishwarya, today was initiated into the world of music at theage of three.
Aishwaryas first full fledged concert was at the age of thirteen.
Since then, she has travelled widely in India and abroad and enthralled her listeners.
Aishwarya, today chaste music is known for Aishwarya chaste music purity, clarity and Aishwarya chaste music high classical appeal.
Aishwarya, today resonant and mellifluous voice has always captivated the audience.
Aishwarya, today concerts are marked by an aesthetic grace and focussed approach.
Aishwarya, today is an A graded artiste of All India Radio and Doordarshan.
Aishwarya, today went on to receive Aishwarya, today B.E. degree in Biotechnology from P.E.S. Institute of Technology, Bangalore.
Abhogi is a raga in Carnatic music and has been adapted to Hindustani music.
Abhogi is a pentatonic scale, an audava or owdava raga.
It is a derived scale, as it does not have all the seven swaras.
Abhogi has been borrowed from Carnatic music into Hindustani music and is also quite popular in the latter.
Structure and Lakshana.
Abhogi is a symmetric pentatonic scale that does not contain panchamam and nishadam.
It is called an audava-audava raga, in Carnatic classification, as Carnatic has 5 notes in both ascending and descending scales.
Its structure is as follows :.
The notes used are shadjam, chathusruti rishabham, sadharana gandharam, shuddha madhyamam and chathusruthi dhaivatham.
Abhogi is a scale that is used for compositions in a medium to fast tempo.
This scale has been used by many composers and there are lots of compositions in classical music.
Abhogi has been used to score film music too.
Here are some popular compositions in Abhogi.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this raga.
Abhogi notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields another pentatonic ragam Valaji.
For more details and illustration of this concept refer Graha bhedam on Abhogi.
P.Moutal understands raag Kalavati as transposition of Abhogi.
List of compositions in Abhogi.
There are also some Tamil movie songs based on the raga of abhogi.
Songs in abhogi raga gives extreme pleasure to ears.
Two Tamil songs are cited below for the reference.
In Hindustani music.
Pakad or Chalan.
GMDS SDRSDMD _ D_SRGRS D_RSDM GMMDDSDRSD_M GMD_MGGRR _ GRSd Rd_S.
Organization & Relationships.
Pa and Ni are omitted.
Also Re is often omitted in ascent.
Flat Ga is often approached from Ma in ascent and has a slight oscillation to show the typical Kanada.
In descent often the typical the typical Kanada phrase gMRS is used.
Related ragas : Bageshree.
However, Bageshree also includes flat Ni and a limited use of Pa, which gives a different flavour.
Thaat : Kafi.
Night, approximately 9PM-12AM.
List of Film Songs based on Hindustani Ragas.
Rao, Suvarnalata ; der Meer, Wim van ; Harvey, Jane The Raga Guide : A Survey of 74 Hindustani Ragas.
Zenith Media, London : 1999.
In compositions with Ugabhoga, a combination of couplets to suit the mood of the main composition is rendered at the beginning.
Possibly Ugabhoga had influence from free style singing without rhythm that existed in all South Indian languages.
Typical examples are Kavya Vaachana.
of Kannada language and Viruttam.
of Tamil language.
However, Sri Purandara Daasa innovatively formated Ugabhoga so that Ugabhoga became an integral part of todays classical Carnatic music.
Later ugabhoga led to freestyle rendering of raga without lyrics known as allapane.
Ugabhogas are common in popular concerts attended both by connoisseurs and non - connoisseurs of music.
Most ugabhogas were written and composed by Purandara Daasa and Kanaka Dasa in the Kannada language during the 15th century.
In the 19th century, similar concepts were also introduced in the Tamil language by Sri Papanasam Sivan.
Ugabhogas are attractive for those who may not understand the nuances of raga as Most ugabhogas pay attention to meaningful lyrics.
The lyrics of ugaabogas are typically either devotional or philosophical in nature.
They are rendered sometimes with rhythm similar to alap with tala in Hindustani music.
Current artists such as Sudha Ragunathan, Vidhyabhusana and M. S.Sheela are continuing this important tradition of Carnatic music.
Recently 4 volumes containing about 80 Ughabhogas are presented by S.K Sharma with rendering by Vidyabhushana.
Ramapriya is a ragam in Carnatic music.
It is the 52nd melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta scale system of Carnatic music.
It is called Ramamanohari in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 4th ragam in the 9th chakra Brahma.
The mnemonic name is Brahma-Bhu.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ra gu mi pa dhi ni.
The mnemonic phrase structure is as follows :.
As it is a melakarta ragam, by definition it is a sampoorna ragam.
It is the prati madhyamam equivalent of Chakravakam, which is the 16th melakarta scale.
Ramapriya has a few minor janya ragams associated with it.
See List of janya ragams for full list of ragams associated with Ramapriya scale.
Here are some compositions sung in concerts, set to Ramapriya.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Rupavati is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Rupavati is the 12th melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
Rupavati is one of the few ragams given the same name by the Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 6th ragam in the 2nd chakra Netra.
The mnemonic name is Netra-Sha.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ra gi ma pa dhu nu.
Its structure is as follows :.
The notes used in this scale are shuddha rishabham, sadharana gandharam, shuddha madhyamam, shatsruthi dhaivatham and kakali nishadham.
As Rupavati is a melakarta ragam, by definition Rupavati is a sampurna ragam.
Rupavati is the shuddha madhyamam equivalent of Divyamani, which is the 48th melakarta scale.
Rupavati is also the original name given to the 12th Melakarta in the list compiled by Venkatamakhin.
The notes used in the scale are the same, but the scales are svarantara-shadava raga.
Rupavati has a few minor janya ragams associated with Rupavati.
See List of janya ragams for full list of ragams associated with Rupavati scale.
Here are a few common compositions sung in concerts, set to Rupavati.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Rupavatis notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, does not yield any melakarta ragam.
Shadvidamargini is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Carnatic is the 46th melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
Carnatic is called Stavarajam in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 4th ragam in the 8th chakra Vasu.
The mnemonic name is the 8th chakra Vasu.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ra gi mi pa dhi ni.
The mnemonic phrase structure is as follows :.
The swaras shuddha rishabham, sadharana gandharam, prati madhyamam, chathusruthi dhaivatham and kaisiki nishadham are used in this scale.
As Carnatic is a melakarta ragam, by definition Carnatic is a sampoorna ragam.
Carnatic is the prati madhyamam equivalent of Natakapriya, which is the 10th melakarta scale.
Shadvidamargini has a few minor janya ragams associated with Carnatic.
See List of janya ragams for full list of ragams associated with Shadvidamargini.
A few compositions set to Shadvidamargini are :.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Shadvidamarginis notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields Nasikabhooshani, a minor melakarta ragam.
Vanaspati is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Vanaspati is the 4th melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragams of Carnatic music, following the Katapayadi sankhya system.
In the Muthuswami Dikshitar school of music, this raga is called Bhanumati.
Structure and Lakshana.
Vanaspati is the 4th ragam in the 1st chakra Indu of the melakarta system.
Vanaspati mnemonic name is Indu-Bhu.
Its mnemonic name mnemonic phrase is sa ra ga ma pa dhi ni.
Its mnemonic phrase structure is as follows :.
Shuddha rishabham, shuddha gandharam, shuddha madhyamam, chathusruthi dhaivatham and kaisiki nishadham are the swaras used in this scale.
As Vanaspati is a melakarta ragam, by definition Vanaspati is a sampoorna ragam.
Vanaspati is the shuddha madhyamam equivalent of Navaneetam, which is the 40th melakarta ragam.
Bhanumati is the 4th Melakarta in the original list compiled by Venkatamakhin.
The notes used in the scale are the same, but the ascending scale is different.
It is an shadava-sampurna raga.
Rasali is one of the better known of few janya ragams associated with Vanaspati.
See List of janya ragams for full list of ragams associated with Vanaspati.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Vanaspatis notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields a minor melakarta ragam Mararanjani.
For further details and an illustration refer Graha bhedam on Vanaspati.
Suvarnangi is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Carnatic is the 47th melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
Carnatic is called Souveeram or Sauviram in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 5th ragam in the 8th chakra Vasu.
The mnemonic name is Vasu-Ma.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ra gi mi pa dhi nu.
The mnemonic phrase structure is as follows :.
Structure and Lakshana . swaras are shuddha rishabham, sadharana gandharam, prati madhyamam, chathusruthi dhaivatham and kakali nishadham.
As Carnatic is a melakarta ragam, by definition Carnatic is a sampoorna ragam.
Carnatic is the prati madhyamam equivalent of Kokilapriya, which is the 11th melakarta.
Suvarnangi has a few minor janya ragams associated with Carnatic.
See List of janya ragams for full list of ragams associated with Suvarnangi.
A few compositions set to Suvarnangi ragam are :.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Suvarnangis notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields no other melakarta ragam.
Avasarala Kanyakumari is a renowned female Carnatic music violinist from South India.
Innovations and Challenging Feats.
more than 4 decades.She has many successful creative innovations to more than 4 decades.She credit.
Vadya Lahari more than 4 decades.She brain child is a new combo of the violin, veena and Nadaswaram.
Tristhayi sangamam Confluence of 3 violins playing in different octaves portraying a special dimension.
Carnatic Music Ensembles of 25, 50, 75 and 100 violins as well as 100 instrument ensemble commemorating the millennium.
29 hours non stop marathon performance.
Recently she has composed 7 ragas bearing the names of the 7 hills of Thirumala.
Awards and honours.
Many prestigious awards and titles have been bestowed uon her.Some of them include.
She was selected for Limca Book of Records 2004 for her various achievements in music as a versatile woman violinist.
She teaches without a price tag and generously encourages students to participate in full measure.
She has also released Violin Lessons Tutorial VCDs for students who do not have access to learn directly from a guru.
Vani Sateesh is a Carnatic vocalist.
Vani Sateesh was born in Bangalore, Karnataka.
Carnatic hails from a family of Carnatic musicians going back many generations.
Carnatic father, Sangeetha Kala Ratna Bellary.
M. Venkateshachar is a carnatic classical vocalist and her uncle Bellary M Sheshagiri Achar was a Vaggeyakara.
Her uncle and father were known as Bellary Brothers and performed in most parts in India during 1950s and 1960s.
The recent lineage of five generations popularly known as Vishesha Parampara spans over 130 years.
It is impossible to fathom and estimate the impact created by this family over the last century in promoting carnatic music.
Vani Sateesh initial training was under the tutelage of her uncle Bellary M. Sheshagiri Achar.
She later learnt from her father Sangeetha Ratna Bellary M. Venkateshachar and then from her brother Bellary M Raghavendra.
She is currently under the tutelage of Padmabhushana Sri P.S.Narayanaswamy, direct disciple of Sangeetha Kalanidhi Semmangudi Srinivasa Iyer.
Vani started performing at a young age.
In Vani earlier days, Vani gave numerous tala vadya concerts.
Vani has also performed many jugalbandi with known Hindustani Classical musicians.
Vani Sateesh is an A grade artist of All India Radio and a B High Graded Composer of All India Radio.
Vani has completed Vani Master in Music from University of Mysore and also has received Indian Government Scholarship for Young Artists.
Vani Sateesh 's style of singing is rich with traditional Carnatic music with emphasis on bhakti rasa.
Dakshinamurthy Pillai lived during 1875 to 1937.
Apart from Khanjira Dakshinamurthy Pillai was also a renowned mrudhanga vidhwan.
Dakshinamurthy Pillai learnt Dakshinamurthy Pillai lessons from Pudukottai Manpundia Pillai.
Dakshinamurthy Pillai was influenced by the concerts of Thanjavur Pakkari Krishna Bhagavathar, Thanjavur Pakkari and Narayana Pai.
Dakshinamurthy Pillai was ardent devotee of Lord Murugan and went on to become famous as Chinmayananda Guru.
Dakshinamurthy Pillai pupils include Palani Subramania Pillai, Thanjavur Pakkari Ramadas, Palghat Mani Iyer Devakottai Sunder Raj and Thangavellu Pillai of Malaysia.
Mrudhanga vidhwan Thangavellu Pillai hailed from Trichy, India and migrated to Malaya in 1927.
Dakshinamurthy Pillai was a leading ganjira artist who accompanied musicians in Carnatic music concerts during the period between 1875CE-1925CE.
Dakshinamurthy Pillai attained Sajeeva Samadhi and was revered as a Mahan according to Madras A. Kannan, a Mrudhangam vidhwan.
MSN Murthy is an eminent Carnatic Music violinist.
Early life and background.
Sangeetha Sahitya Kalanidhi Sriman Nallan Chakravarthula Krishnamacharyulu.
M. S. N. Murthy has been known to be a child prodigy and started performing at an early age of 10.
He is an Empanelled Artiste of Indian Council for Cultural Relations.
Solo performances at various places.
Accompanied many a veteran vidwan like Smt.
Robert E. Brown.
Robert Edward Bob Brown was an ethnomusicologist who is credited with coining the term world music.
Robert Edward Bob Brown was also well known for Robert Edward Bob Brown recordings of music from Indonesia.
Robert Edward Bob Brown grew up in Clinton, New York.
Robert Edward Bob Brown had a very extensive background in music while still young.
A sponsor performed the first movement of the Schumann piano concerto with the high school orchestra during A sponsor sophomore year.
The same year, A sponsor held the job of organist at Hamilton College.
A sponsor also performed popular music with A sponsor own band, Bobby Brown and A sponsor Swingsters.
Bob Brown started Robert Edward Bob Brown doctoral studies at UCLA as a piano major in 1953.
Robert Edward Bob Brown received Robert Edward Bob Brown doctorate in ethnomusicology from UCLA.
Robert Edward Bob Brown dissertation was titled The Mrdanga : A Study of Drumming in South India.
Robert Edward Bob Brown studied and played the mridangam.
Robert Edward Bob Brown began teaching at Wesleyan University in 1961.
Robert Edward Bob Brown founded the world music / ethnomusicology program at Wesleyan.
It was here that Robert Edward Bob Brown first used the term world music to describe the ethnomusicology program.
The result would be a person with musical competence in two cultures : bi-musicality.
Robert Edward Bob Brown was one of the organizers of the American Society for Eastern Arts.
In 1973, Robert Edward Bob Brown founded the Center for World Music.
Robert Edward Bob Brown remained president of the organization until Robert Edward Bob Brown death.
Robert Edward Bob Brown began teaching at San Diego State University in 1979.
Robert Edward Bob Brown served as the Chair of the School of Music for three years from 1979 to 1982.
Robert Edward Bob Brown retired in 1992.
The Robert E. Brown Center for World Music, which opened in April 2008, was named in Robert Edward Bob Brown honor.
Robert Edward Bob Brown produced five of the early recordings from Indonesia in the Explorer Series released on Nonesuch Records.
Two of the recordings were from Bali, and three were from Java :.
T. V. Gopalakrishnan.
Tirupanithurai Viswanatha Gopalakrishnan is a Carnatic and Hindustani musician from Chennai.
Gopalakrishnan hails from a family of musicians spanning over two centuries.
T.G.Viswanatha Bhagavathar is a vocalist, plays the violin and is also an exponent of the mridangam.
He is a disciple of Chembai Vaidyanatha Bhagavathar.
His students include Ilayaraja, A.R.Rahman, Sivamani, Kadri Gopalnath, Vidyabhushana.
He has also collaborated with drummer/composer Franklin Kiermyer on live performances.
Gopalakrishnan was given the Sangeet Natak Akademi Award in 1990.
He has been awarded the Padma Bhushan by the Government of India in the year 2012.
Ghatam Maestro Late T V Vasan is his younger brother.
In his career spanning over five decades, many honours and awards that have been bestowed on Dr.TVG.
A few outstanding awards have been :.
This is an incomplete list of releases.
The release dates are also not always indicative of the original release date of the associated record.
Shadkala Govinda Marar.
Govinda Marar was born in 1798 in Ramamangalam in Kerala.
Shadkala Govinda Marar . parents belonged to community of Marars who performed the traditional singing in the temples of Kerala.
Shadkala Govinda Marar . took to singing from a very early age.
Shadkala Govinda Marar . received Shadkala Govinda Marar . musical lessons from Haripad Ramaswamy Bhagavathar.
Shadkala Govinda Marar . is said to have used a Tamburu having seven strings.
At the age of 21, Shadkala Govinda Marar . left Shadkala Govinda Marar . home to begin a life of wandering.
Shadkala Govinda Marar . is believed to have sung in many important temples all over Kerala.
After leading a wandering life for a long time, Shadkala Govinda Marar . reached the temple of Panduranga in Pandharpur, Maharashtra.
Shadkala Govinda Marar . was revered as Paramahamsa Govinda Das.
The temple records note that Shadkala Govinda Marar . attained Samadhi in 1843.
Shatkala Govinda Marar Smaraka Kalasamithy.
Prof. M. P. Manmadhan - the eminent sarvodaya leader and social worker came to know about Sri.
Govinda Marar from a speech delivered by the great Malayalam poet Ulloor S. Parameswara Iyer.
The Shatkala Govinda Marar Smaraka Kala Samithy took birth under the chairmanship of Prof. M. P. Manmadhan in 1980.
After the death of Prof. M. P. Manmadhan, Sri.
C. Radhakrishnan, Sri.
M. P. Gopalakrishnan and Prof. Mavelikkara Prabhakara Varma lead the Samithy.
Prof. George S. Paul is presently leading the Samithy.
Classes have been arranged to impart training in classical music, classical dance and temple arts.
Shatkala Govinda Marar Sangeetholsavam.
Maha Vaidyanatha Iyer.
Maha Vaidyanatha Sivan was a composer of Carnatic music.
Maha Vaidyanatha Sivan was a great exponent of extemporaneous singing.
Maha Vaidyanatha Sivan also composed a ragamalika with all the 72 melakartha ragas.
Vaidyanatha Iyer was born in the village of Viyacheri in the Thanjavur districts of Tamil Nadu.
Later Maha Vaidyanatha Iyer . continued Maha Vaidyanatha Iyer . training under Manambuchavadi Venkatasubbayyar, one of Tyagaraja 's disciples.
Maha Vaidyanatha Iyer . was famous for Maha Vaidyanatha Iyer . elaboration of ragas.
Maha Vaidyanatha Sivan composed mainly in Telugu and Tamil and used the mudra Guhadasa.
Some of Some famous compositions are Pahimam Srirajarajeswari and Neekela dayaradu.
The meaning of Veekku in Malayalam language is beating hard.
The artist produce sound on Veekku Chenda by hitting the drum using a stick without twisting or rolling The artist wrist.
In Tulu Nadu it is known as chande.
It has a length of two feet and a diameter of one foot.
Both ends are covered with the Chenda Vattam.
The Chenda is suspended from the drummers neck so that the Uruttu Chenda hangs vertically.
Though both sides can be used for playing, only one is actually beaten.
Using two sticks, the drummer strikes the upper parchment.
Sanjay Subrahmanyan is a Carnatic Vocalist from India.
Early life and Background.
Sanjay Subrahmanyan was born in Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India.
a Carnatic Vocalist from India began learning music at the age of seven.
Initial training was under V. Lakshminarayana on the violin as well as in vocal music.
He later switched to vocal music and was trained by Rukmini Rajagopalan for a period of almost eight years.
a Carnatic Vocalist from India continues to learn from Nadaswaram maestro Semponarkoil SRD Vaidyanathan.
Outside of music, a Carnatic Vocalist from India is an avid cricket fan.
Sanjay Subrahmanyan has been the subject of documentary film Aaraar aasaippadaar by filmmaker Prasanna Ramaswamy.
It opened to rave reviews in November 2006 in Chennai.
a Carnatic Vocalist from India has toured Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia, Australia, US, Canada, UK, Switzerland and Oman.
Salem K. Meera.
Salem K. Meera is a renowned Carnatic musician in Salem Sangeetha.
Carnatic is well versed in vocal, veena and keyboard.
Salem Sangeetha K.Meera has composed so many swara jathis, varnams, thilanas and Tamil songs.
Salem K.Meera is the Joint President of Salem Sangeetha Vidwath sabha for the past three years.
Also Salem K.Meera has served as the President of the sabha for six years, secretary for six years.
Committee member and vice president for 12 years.
Salem K.Meera is an active and creative participant in the sabha activities.
Salem K.Meera has been performing in the Salem Sangeetha sabha from 1950 until now.
Salem Sangeetha K.Meera is the daughter of Late Sri.S.
Kanakasabapathy mudaliar and Mrs. Gowri Kanakasabapathy.
a great Sangeetha vidushi was born on 18-Oct-1946.
a great Sangeetha vidushi is also the niece of Kalaimamani.
Salem S. Jayalakshmi.
Salem S. Jayalakshmi . started Salem S. Jayalakshmi . music career under the guidance of Salem S. Jayalakshmi . mother.
Harikesanallur Muthiah Bagavadar.
Sri.M.Manavala Naidus guru was Sri.
Belakuvadi Srinivasa Iyengar.
In Isai Sorpozhivu ' 25th year Isai Sorpozhivu ' got many titles like  Gana Kalavani  honoured and given by Silasri.
GnanaPrakasa Swamigal of Kanchi Thondai Mandala mutt.
Kanchi Thondai Mandala mutt was also blessed and honored by Kanchi Maha Periyavar on 1-4-1970 at Kolla Chatram Kanchi.
Performances and honors.
Kanchi Thondai Mandala mutt had given many concerts at Music Academy, Tamil Isai Sangham and Bharadhya Vidya Bhavan.
She was honored and praised by Minerva Principal and great music critic Sri.Prasuram Iyer.
Also she had performed at Bidaram Rama Mandiram sabha concert at Bangalore Veerabadraya, with accompanies Sri.
Seshagiri Rao on violin and Sri.
Nagapushana Achariar on the mridangham.
Seshagiri Raos guru was Sri.
At this occasion T. Chowdaiya . received the title  Laya Gnana Isai Perarasi  and was appreciated and blessed by Sri.
Trichy Thayumanavan . was honored for Trichy Thayumanavan . music service rendered to the salemites by the Salem Rotary Club.
venpas, in 18 ragas as ragamaliga.
Trichy Thayumanavan . was accompanied by well known musicians on the instruments for Trichy Thayumanavan . vocal, veena and keyboard concerts.
Culture & Tradition.
Trichy Thayumanavan . brings up Hindu culture & tradition and Trichy Thayumanavan . celebrates every festival accordingly.
Trichy Thayumanavan . not only teaches music to Trichy Thayumanavan . disciples but also the Hindu tradition & culture.
Salem Sangeetha Vidwath Sabha.
Madras Music Academy.
Madras Music Academy is one of the earliest established Music Academies in South India.
They also run a music school called the Teachers college of Carnatic Music which has many eminent musicians on its faculty.
In 1927, Indian National Congress held the All India Music Conference in Madras.
At the end of the conference it was decided that an organisation be formed that helped the cause of music.
Annual music conferences are held every December to collect all information regarding music, maintain the library and publish a journal.
They also help to bring to public notice aspiring musicians and scholars by conducting competitions and other presentations.
For a decade, E.Krishna Iyer worked as the Secretary of the Madras Music Academy.
The first Music Festival was held in Carnatic Music every December, 1927 which is before the inauguration of the Music Academy.
This soon became the norm for all sabhas in Madras to conduct several concerts each day during the season.
However it was the Madras Music Academy that set the trend of conducting the music festival during Carnatic Music every December.
Dr. U. Rama Rao was the founder President of the Academy, there have been six others in that post.
The present President is Sri N. Murali.
Before the present building was constructed the annual conferences, programmes where held in various locations around the city.
During the first few years, the Academy conducted its activities provisionally in George Town and later moved to Mylapore.
On December 20, 1962, Maharaja Jayachamaraja Wodeyar Bahadur, the then Governor of Madras.
There are two buildings for the Music Academy :.
The T.T. Krishnamachari Hall is the first building that was built in 1955.
It is after this building that the road on which it lies was named the TTK Road.
It has a seating capacity of 1600.
The Kasturi Srinivasan Hall was built in 1982.
It houses a small auditorium for conferences and concerts, a library, a committee room and a recording and demonstration room.
It was here that Tiruvavaduthurai Rajaratnam Pillai s tapes and audio CDs were produced.
It also has a photo gallery named the Vinyasa Art Gallery which is used during the season to exhibit photos.
Kasturi Srinivasans nephews son, N. Murali, the Joint Managing Director of The Hindu, is the present President of the Academy.
Music Academy received a donation of Rs.
1,00,000 from late Sri.
S. Visvanathan in memory of late Sri.
K. R. Sundaram Iyer for the improvement of library activities.
The library is now named as Sri K. R. Sundaram Iyer Memorial Library.
It has rare books, manuscripts and tape recordings of the proceedings of the Expert Committee sessions.
The students of the Teachers College of Music, members, music students and research scholars.
Next to Acropolis Building.
Nallan Chakravartula Krishnamacharyulu.
He belongs the lineage of Saint Tyagaraja and is the 5th generation student descendant of the great saint.
Life & Career.
He was born in 1924 in Jaggayya peta, Andhra Pradesh to parents Jagannaadha Tiru Venkataacharyulu and Venkata Ramanamma.
At a very early age, he started learning vyaakaraNa and meemaamsa sastras from his father and later from sri chilakamarri kesavaacharyulu.
Sri Krishnmacharyulu served as staff violinist in All India Radio Vijayawada from 1948 to 1983.
Sri Krishnmacharyulu was conferred with the title of Gaana kalA prapuurna by the Anadhra Pradesh Sangeetha Academy.
Sri Krishnamacharylu created several scholarly works in Sanskrit and Telugu.
Just like earlier vaggeyakaras, he never needed to think of the verses due to his extraordinary scholarship in Sanskrit and Telugu.
Sri Krishnamacharyulu is inspirational musician for some upcoming musicians in the family, for instance, Nallan Chakravartula Partha Sarathy.
His devotion and dedication to music is incomparable.
Type Tala !!.
Devoleena Bhattacharjee is an Bengali actress on Indian television.
She is famous for her role as Gopi bahu from the show Saath Nibhaana Saathiya.
Devoleena Bhattacharjee was born to a Bengali Brahmin family, and was born and brought up at Sivasagar, Assam.
a Bengali Brahmin family has two younger brother.
Devoleena Bhattacharjee came to the city of MIDC Mumbai to try a Bengali Brahmin family luck in the entertainment industry.
Devoleena Bhattacharjee then applied for a shift back to Sivasagar, Assam last year.
her mother, who works in ONGC has done her mother, who works in ONGC schooling from GBME School, Sivasagar Assam.
her mother, who works in ONGC has completed the graduation In Commerce.
Later her mother, who works in ONGC has learned Bharatnatyam from Kalakshetra, Chennai.
Devoleena Bhattacharjee has learned classical music till visharad part 1 in Sivasagar, Assam at very early stage.
her mother, who works in ONGC has also learned Bharatnatyam from Kalakshetra, Chennai.
her mother, who works in ONGC has won a lot of dance competitions.
And was in the Top 100 in Dance India Dance.
After a Jewellery designer GILI joined Sawaare Sabke Sapne Preeto with NDTV Imagine as Bani.
The story is located against a Punjabi backdrop and is based on the lives of five sisters.
Devoleena Bhattacharjee played the role of Baani Kaur Dhillon, younger sister of Preeto in the serial.
Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa 5 is paired opposite Ahem Modi in the show.
Bhupalam is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Bhupalam is a pentatonic scale.
Bhupalam is a janya ragam, as Bhupalam does not have all the seven swaras.
Bhupalam is also written as Bhoopalam.
Bhupalam is considered an auspicious scale and a morning ragam.
In Tamil music, this scale is called Puranirmai pann and some thevarams are set to this scale.
This ragam is played in the mornings before opening the sanctum-sanctorum of temples, using nadaswaram.
It is also used for chanting slokas, folks songs, Kathakali music and other rituals.
The equivalent scale in Hindustani music is Bhupal Todi.
Structure and Lakshana.
Bhupalam is a symmetric ragam that does not contain madhyamam or nishadham.
Bhupalam is a symmetric pentatonic scale.
Its ascending and descending scale is as follows :.
Bhupalam ragam lends Bhupalam for good elaboration and has a few compositions in both classical music and film music.
Here are some popular songs composed in Bhupalam.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Bhupalams notes when shifted using Graha bhedham, yields another pentatonic ragam, Gambhiranata.
For more details and illustration of this concept refer Graha bhedham on Gambhiranata.
Emani Sankara Sastry.
Emani Sankara Sastry, was a renowned Veena Vadanatatvegna player of Carnatic music.
Emani Sankara Sastry was born on September 23, 1922 in Draksharama, Andhra Pradesh.
Emani Sankara Sastry . came from a family of celebrated classical musicians.
His graceful playing on the veena in strictly traditional style evoked a reverential listening.
Emani gave concerts throughout the length and breadth of India.
His own compositions of keerthanas, javalis and bhajans can be frequently heard in his solo concerts.
His operas in Hindi and regional languages are also very popular.
Emani joined All India Radio in 1959 as producer of music at Madras.
Soon he rose to the position of director and composer of national orchestra and chief producer of music.
Emani was also associated with cultural and academic organizations.
Emani introduced a number of budding young singers to the musical world.
Honors and awards.
Many other titles were conferred upon Vainika Sikhamani.
He was invited to participate in the  PAN ASIATIC MUSIC AND DANCE FESTIVAL  at Rome during July 1980.
His major monumental works in orchestration :.
Adarsa sikhararohanam - An orchestral composition based on the theme of the conquest of Everest in which Everest used six veenas.
Ragam Thanam Pallavi - an orchestral composition based on the classical raga Todi.
It was an experiment first of its kind in classical music which won the appreciation of musicians and the listeners.
Bharata jyoti - a thematic musical composition on late Pandit Nehru and Pandit Nehru achievements.
Saumya pursh - a musical composition on late Mahatma Gandhiji 's ideals.
He enthralled people by his concert of the veena which was classed as the concert of the century by discerning reviewers.
He was one of the most outstanding artists constantly in demand in India and abroad.
He contributed a number of recordings on A.I.R. and two long-playing records for UNESCO for release all over the world.
Among them are :.
In Carnatic music, the Akshipthika is the first part or the introductory part of the alapana.
Carnatic gives an idea about the raga in which the song is going to be sung.
Carnatic is followed by the ragavardhini.
the Akshipthika is the introduction to the raagam.
Thus, there is no particular order or manner in which it must be performed.
Asaveri is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Carnatic is a janya ragam from the 8th melakarta scale Hanumatodi.
Asaveri is an ancient ragam, which is mentioned in the Sangita Ratnakara.
Asaveri resembles Komal Asavari and Asa Todi of Hindustani classical music.
The Asavari of Hindustani music resembles Natabhairavi of Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Asaveri is an asymmetric ragam that does not contain gandharam and nishadam in the ascending scale.
It is an audava-vakra-sampurna ragam.
Its arohana-avarohana structure is as follows :.
For the details of the notations and terms, see swaras in Carnatic music.
There are many compositions set to Saveri ragam.
Here are some popular kritis composed in this ragam.
Tiruchy L. Saravanan.
He began at the age of 10 in both vocal and Carnatic Flute.
of India Advanced Learning sponsorship.
Saravanan, being trained under vocal and violin teachers assimilated Dr. N. Ramanis technqiues aptly.
National recognition and awards.
He also received the Saptha Swara Kulal Isai Mani and the Senior Flautist awards from the Madras Music Academy.
In the Rama Gana Sabha in Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh he was honoured as Venu Gana Nipuna.
He has also given Santoor - Flute Jugalbhandi concerts with the late R. Visweswaran, a disciple of the Santoor Maestro Pt.
Sudharani Raghupathi, Padmashri.
Chitra Visweswaran and Padmashri Dr. Smt.
Saraswathi Sundaresan . copious fluidity in.
Contribution in Singapore.
The SIFAS octet ensemble which he composed in 2004 won the second prize in the competition.
Saravanans natural gift in understanding the nuances of Carnatic music, put Saravanans on the edge over other composer musicians in Singapore.
Saravanans sensitivity and almost near diction in orchestrating Indian classical music is noteworthy.
This is a tediously time consuming process taking years to form in timbre and quality before reaching the concert platform.
To increase his repertoire, he also performs in rare ragas, to explore more possibilities with the Carnatic flute.
A teacher of purity.
Emphasising on the strong tradition of chaste Carnatic music strictly refraining from any form of popular music influences.
Natesan Ramani is an Indian Carnatic flautist.
Early life and background.
N. Ramani was born in Tiruvarur in Tamil Nadu.
Aside from the influence of Natesan Ramani place of birth, Natesan Ramani was born into a musical family.
Ramanis grandfather, Sri Aazhiyur Narayanaswami Iyer, was his first guru and was a well known flute artist and singer himself.
Origin of the Indian Carnatic flute.
Sharaba Shastri has been characterized by Sharaba Shastri followers as a musical genius after experimenting and creating the Indian Carnatic flute.
The Sharaba Shastri style or bani of playing was established and was carried on by Sharaba Shastri disciple Sanjeeva Rao.
Dr. N. Ramani Interview about Mali.
To further enhance tala dynamics, Palladam Sanjeeva Rao followed the GNB style which was developed by the legendary G. N. Balasubramaniam.
An interview with the Hindu.
According to Natesan Ramani, Malis teaching methods were worth emulating.
A good teacher should be open to learning from A good teacher students too.
Mali learnt Aahiri raga from me, which I had learnt from T. Vishwanathan, Balasaraswathis brother.
In 1996, T. Vishwanathan gained the most prestigious title/award in Indian Carnatic music, Sangeetha Kalanidhi.
Honours and accolades.
Some of the holds an honorary Cultural Doctorate from The World University of Arizona.
Glossary of Carnatic music.
Carnatic music terms are briefly described in this page.
Major terms have their own separate article pages, while minor terms are defined / described here.
Most of the keerthanas/kritis used in Carnatic music is based on Telugu language.
The order of Major terms is from basic to related terms, rather than alphabetic.
the Sruti is musical pitch.
It is considered equivalent to tonic of western music.
This is the pitch at which the drone is set, which is usually played by a tambura.
In Carnatic music, Sthai refers to the octave, especially in the Telugu language.
Swaram or Swara is a single note.
Each swaram defines the position of note in relation to the Sruti.
A ragam prescribes a set of rules for building a melody - very similar to the Western concept of mode.
Different combination of swarams and swaram phrases form different ragams.
Arohanam of a ragam is the ascending scale of the ragam.
Avarohanam of a ragam is the descending scale of the ragam.
Avarohanam describes the rules for singing descending notes of a ragam.
A Melakarta ragam is one which has all seven swarams, namely, Sa, Ri, Ga, Ma, Pa, Dha and Ni.
The arohanam and avarohanam of a melakarta ragam are strictly ascending and descending scales.
It is also known as janaka ragam, because other ragams are derived from it.
A Janya ragam is one which is derived from a Melakarta ragam.
Ata talam refers to the rhythm cycle or beat cycle for a particular song.
Ragam Alapana is a preface to a song, which explores the ragam of the song, without any lyrics.
Ragam Alapana is a slow improvisation with no talam.
Niraval or Neraval is the repeated singing of one or two lines of a song, with improvised exposition in each repetition.
Kalpanaswaram literally means imagined swarams.
Niraval is the singing of swarams of the ragam of a song, following the completion of the song.
Tanam is rhythmic / rhythm based improvisation of the ragam.
It is done with rhythm based syllables like tha, nam, thom and na.
It is usually included as second part in a Ragam Tanam Pallavi.
Ragamalika, which literally means garland of ragams, is a composition that has different verses set to different ragams.
Ragamalika swarams refers to singing of Kalpanaswarams in different ragams.
Ragam Tanam Pallavi.
Ragam Tanam Pallavi is a rendition of Carnatic music which lends to total improvisation, in different forms.
Carnatic consists of Ragam Alapana, Tanam and a Pallavi line.
The pallavi line is sung many times in different speeds, different ranges of the ragam and different octaves.
This is usually followed by Kalpanaswarams, sometimes in multiple ragams.
Viruttam is a devotional verse or phrase sung in an impromptu choice of ragam or ragamalika usually before a song.
The ragam is usually the same as that of the song that follows.
Manodharma is the concept of impromptu or spontaneous improvisation, which is one of the important aspects of Carnatic music.
There are many types of improvisations, like Ragam Ragam Alapana, Thanam, Niraval, Viruttam and Kalpanaswaram.
Kalpita sangeetam is music that is already composed, learnt and practiced.
Kalpita sangeetam is opposite of Manodharma sangeetam, which complements Kalpita sangeetam.
The seven swarams in Carnatic music, then followed by other terms related to swaram.
The first swaram in the scale is Shadjam.
Shadjam is invariant and is always included in all ragams.
The second swaram in the scale is Rishabham.
Rishabham has three pitch possibilities, namely Suddha, Chathusruti and Shatsruti.
The third swaram in the scale is Gandharam.
Gandharam has three pitch possibilities, namely Suddha, Sadharana and Antara.
The fourth swaram in the scale is Madhyamam.
Madhyamam has two pitch possibilities, namely Suddha and Prati.
The fifth swaram in the scale is the Nishadham.
the Nishadham is invariant.
The sixth swaram in the scale is the Nishadham.
the Nishadham has three pitch possibilities, namely Suddha, Chathusruti and Shatsruti.
The seventh swaram in the scale is the Nishadham.
It has three pitch possibilities, namely Suddha, Kaisiki and Kakali.
Anya swaram in a janya ragam is a swaram that is not found in its parent ragam.
Anya means outside the set / group.
Sthai refers to an octave of music.
There are 5 sthais in Carnatic music, namely, Anumandra, Mandra, Madhya, Tara and Athitara.
Most artists sing over two octaves or two and a half octaves range.
Very few can sing well in bigger range of 3 or more octaves.
Anga means part.
In the context of a ragams scale, the terms poorvanga and uttaranga are used.
Gamaka is the term used for variations of the swarams in a scale.
Gamaka can refer to the shake of the note, grace around the note, decoration or embellishment of the swaram.
Vadi swaram in a ragam is the main / primary swaram of importance in it.
A vadi swaram is repeated quite often in a rendition.
Samvadi swaram in a ragam has a concordant effect with the vadi swaram.
Samvadi swaram in a ragam has a good effect to the ear along with the vadi.
In western music Samvadi swaram in a ragam is equivalent of the consonant.
Vivadi swaram in a ragam has a discordant effect with the vadi swaram in it.
In western music it is equivalent of the dissonant.
Anuvadi swaram in a ragam has neither concordant nor discordant effect with the vadi swaram.
A musical notes phrase of a ragam is known as Prayogam.
Vishesha means special.
Hence, important phrases of a ragam are known as Vishesha Prayogams.
Missing swarams in a janya ragam, when derived from a melakarta ragam are referred as varjya.
For example, Rishabham and Panchamam are varjya in Hindolam when derived from Natabhairavi.
They go up and down.
A janya ragam is Upanga if all the swarams in its scale are strictly derived from its melakarta ragam.
There are no anya swarams.
A janya ragam is Bhashanga if an anya swaram is introduced in its scale, when derived from its melakarta ragam.
A janya ragam is Nishadhantya if the highest note that can be played is the Nishadham.
Examples are Nadanamakriya and Punnagavarali ragams.
A janya ragam is Dhaivadhantya if the highest note that can be played is the Dhaivatam.
Example Kurinji ragam.
A janya ragam is Panchamantya if the highest note that can be played is the Panchamam.
Example Navroj ragam.
Tuning the sruti to Ma is called Madhyama sruti.
the Sruti is usually set for Panchamantya, Dhaivadhantya and Nishadhantya ragams.
Sampurna ragam is a ragam that has all seven swarams, namely, Sa, Ri, Ga, Ma, Pa, Dha and Ni.
Shadava ragam is a ragam that has only six of the seven swarams in its scale.
Owdava ragam is a ragam that has only five of the seven swarams in its scale.
It is a pentatonic scale.
Svarantara ragam is a ragam that has only four of the seven swarams in its scale.
Jathi of a talam specifies beat count of the rhythm cycle.
Jathi of a talam specifically applies to lagu component of the talam and not necessarily to the entire talam.
The different jathis are tisra, chathusra, khanda, misra and sankeerna.
Gati of a talam specifies sub-divisions of a beat in a composition.
It is also referred as Nadai.
Chathusra gati is the most common, followed by Tisra.
Khanda are Khanda, Misra chapu talam . and Sankeerna.
Lagu is the component of a talam which is the variant part.
Its beat count is dependent on the jathi of the talam.
The action for counting includes a tap / clap, followed by a count of sub-beats of the full rhythm cycle.
Note that a tisra jathi lagu is actually 1 clap and 2 counts = 3 beats.
Dhrutham is the component of a talam which is invariant and includes only two beats.
Dhrutham action includes a tap / clap, followed by a veechu.
Anudhrutham is the component of a talam which is invariant and includes only one beat.
Its action is a tap / clap.
Avartanam of a talam refers to one cycle of the talam.
Most talams have at least 1 lagu, except for the rare talams.
Eduppu, from Tamil, from Tamil, means start.
Eduppu, from Tamil denotes the point within the Avartanam of a talam when a composition or stanza in a composition begins.
Onru, Onrarai are common, other than Samam which starts in synchronization with the beginning of a talam.
Rupaka talam refers to the group of talams that consist of 1 dhrutam, followed by 1 lagu.
Rupaka talam also refers to chathusra-jathi rupaka talam as a default.
Triputa talam refers to the group of talams that consist of 1 lagu, followed by 2 dhrutams.
Triputa talam also refers to tisra-jathi triputa talam as a default.
Dhruva talam refers to the group of talams that consist of 1 lagu, followed by 1 dhrutam, followed by two lagus.
Dhruva talam also refers to chathusra-jathi dhruva talam as a default, unless a different jathi is specified.
Matya talam refers to the group of talams that consist of 1 lagu, followed by 1 dhrutam, followed by 1 lagu.
Matya talam also refers to chathusra-jathi matya talam as a default.
Jhampa talam refers to the group of talams that consist of 1 lagu, followed by 1 anudhrutam, followed by 1 dhrutam.
Jhampa talam also refers to misra-jathi jhampa talam as a default.
Ata talam refers to the group of talams that consist of 2 lagus, followed by 2 dhrutams.
Ata talam also refers to khanda-jathi ata talam as a default.
Eka talam refers to the group of talams that consist of 1 lagu only.
Eka talam also refers to chathusra-jathi eka talam as a default.
Adhi talam refers to chathusra-jathi triputa talam, which is very common in Carnatic music.
This is the equivalent of 8 beat / 16 beat of Western music.
Khanda chapu talam.
Khanda chapu refers to a talam with 10 beat avartanam which does not fit into above classification of Most talams.
Misra chapu talam.
Desadhi refers to adhi talam with, where the eduppu is one and a half beats from beginning of avaratanam.
Kalai refers to the speed of the talam during a rendition of song.
Learning Carnatic music involves learning most of the following exercises, mostly in the order listed below.
Sarali varisai is used to learn the swarams in the octave, usually in Mayamalavagowla ragam.
It is learnt in simple straight ascending and descending fashion and a few variations.
It is also learnt in multiple speeds.
Avali means row or arrangement.
Swaravali are exercises with different arrangements of swarams.
Avali is shortened and referred as Sarali, as in Sarali varisai described above.
Jhanta varisai are exercises used to learn the swarams in the octave in twin fashion and a few other combinations.
It is also usually learnt in Mayamalavagowla ragam.
Dhattu literally means jump.
Example, sa ma ri ga, sa ri ga ma, and so on.
Each of these exercises are set to different talams, so that different rhythm aspects are learnt.
Alankara means decoration.
Types of composition.
Geetham means song or melody.
Geethams are the first songs that are learnt.
They are very short and are the first exercises where singing lyrics along with They swaram patterns are learnt.
Swarajati lead to learning bigger songs / compositions after learning Geethams.
They are set to different ragams and lead towards learning varnams and kritis.
Varnam is the most complex of vocal exercises.
In modern carnatic concerts, Varnam is usually sung as a first song and is supposed to help warm-up.
Keerthanam or Kriti is the category of most compositions in Carnatic music.
A concert consists mainly of Keerthanams with zero or one of Varnam, Ragam Thanam Pallavi and Thillana included in appropriate order.
For Kriti, see Keerthanam above.
In instrumental performances, Thillana is a melodic rhythmic piece.
Parts of a composition.
a Ragam Tanam Pallavi is the first verse in a composition, especially varanams, Keerthanams or Kritis.
Anupallavi is an optional verse that follows the pallavi in a composition, especially keerthanams or kritis.
Charanams are the verse that follow the pallavi or anupallavi.
Chittaswarams are set swaram phrases, in a composition  usually a kriti appended to enrich Kriti beauty.
It is sung at the end of the anupallavi and charanam.
This is more related to the songs for dance performances, like Bharatanatyam.
Tani avartanam refers to the extended solo that is played by the percussionists in a concert.
Tukkadas are compositions played towards the end of Carnatic concerts.
Ramnad V. Raghavan was a South Indian player of the mridangam.
Ramnad V. Raghavan was born in Madurai, Tamil Nadu, India, to P. Vaidyanatha Ayyar of Kooniyur, Tirunelveli district, and Brhannayaki.
Beginning in 1970, Ramnad V. Raghavan taught for many years at Wesleyan University in Connecticut, United States.
Ramnad V. Raghavan was also a key initiator for the Cleveland Thyagaraja Aradhana.
Ramnad V. Raghavan retired and moved to Chennai, India.
Ramnad V. Raghavan died on November 21, 2009 at the age of 82 in Chennai.
Ramnad V. Raghavan students have included Glen Velez, Jamey Haddad, David Nelson, Patricia Shehan Campbell, Frank Bennett, and Joseph M. Getter.
Sirkazhi Govindarajan was a leading vocalist in Carnatic Music.
Sirkazhi Govindarajan, was born at Sangeetha Vidwan Sirkali, a small town in Madras Presidency to Siva Chidambaram and Avayambal Ammal.
Sangeetha Vidwan Sirkali was the birthplace of Thirugnanasambandar, one of the Samaya Naalvar and the 63 Nayanmar of the Saiva faith.
Samaya Naalvar son Sirkazhi G. Sivachidambaram is also a Carnatic singer.
He graduated from the Tamil Isai College in Chennai in 1949 with the Degree Isaimani.
He also graduated with the Degree of Sangeetha Vidwan.
Under his tutelage and in-depth study, he gained knowledge of the nuances and intricacies of Indian Music, especially, Classical Carnatic Music.
During this period, 1951-1952, he won many competitions, conducted by the Sangeetha Vidwat Sabha and the Rasika Ranjani Sabha.
He was conferred the Padma Shri award by the Government of India.
The Central College of Carnatic Music was the next institution for his musical enrichment.
Sirkazhi Govindarajan had also done playback singing in Tamil, Telugu, Kannada and Malayalam films.
Madras University conferred a doctorate on Sirkazhi Govindarajan in 1983.
Sirkazhi Govindarajan died in 1988, aged 55.
Ariyakudi Ramanuja Iyengar.
Ariyakudi developed unique style of singing came to be known as The Ariyakudi Tradition and is followed by his students.
He established the modern katcheri traditions in Carnatic music.
The doyen of Carnatic Music, Semmangudi Srinivasa Iyer is known to have remarked I was greatly influenced by Ariyakudi Ramanuja Iyengar.
I do not want another life.
But if there is one, I want to be able to sing like Ramanuja Iyengar.
Palghat Mani Iyer is to have said Anaa and Iyengarval are like I two eyes.
This was followed by Padma Bhushan by Government of India in 1958.
Early life and background.
He learnt under Pudukottai Malayappa Iyer and Namakkal Narasimha Iyengar in his early years.
Later he learnt for several years under Poochi Srinivasa Iyengar who was the senior most disciple of Patnam Subramania Iyer.
He made his debut at Tyagaraja Aradhana in 1918.
Ariyakudis famous disciples include K V Narayanaswamy, B Rajam Iyer, Alappuzha Venkatesan and Madurai N Krishnan.
Ramesh Vinayakam is an Indian music composer and singer.
Ramesh Vinayakam was born Ramasubramaniam to Tamil people Ramesh Vinayakam and Valli.
Ramesh Vinayakam went to A. M. Jain College and later graduated in Commerce from the University of Madras.
In 1986, Ramesh Vinayakams first album Prathidhvani was released.
The album was a compilation of devotional songs on 10 deities, all sung by S. P. Balasubrahmanyam.
Three years later, director Moulee offered director Moulee a Telugu film, Paila Pacheesu and made director Moulee a music director.
director Moulee worked with Moulee on two more films, Manchi Roju and Aunty starring Shobana and Jayasudha, respectively.
Subsequently, director Moulee would again look for work and approach various producers and directors.
Ramesh Vinayakam recalls that nothing happened thereafter and calling it a long and frustrating period.
Nee Romba Azhaga Irukke.
Ramesh Vinayakams contribution to the ensemble soundtrack was the song Thottu Thottu that was also sung by him.
The same year he composed for the film University that was his first full-fledged project in Tamil.
The Hindu in its review wrote that the soundtrack album was very strong on melody and definitely worth a listen.
Written and produced by Kamal Haasan, it featured Madhavan in the lead.
For the film, Kamal Haasan further made Kamal Haasan sing an English song in the country genre.
He received positive critical response for his work in Azhagiya Theeye in particular.
Aside from film, Ramesh Vinayakam has primarily worked on devotional music.
Ramesh Vinayakam composed Ramesh Vinayakam first devotional song at age 12.
Ramesh Vinayakam is a notable singer, too.
While Ramesh Vinayakam has sung songs in all Ramesh Vinayakam Tamil films, Ramesh Vinayakam has also sung playback for other composers.
Under Harris Jayaraj s direction, Ramesh Vinayakam had performed the song Yaaridamum from the film Thotti Jaya.
In 2010, Ramesh Vinayakam sang the number Sada Siva from the Telugu film Khaleja for composer Mani Sharma.
In 2012, Ramesh Vinayakam sang the song Stop The Pattu from Moondru Per Moondru Kaadhal for composer Yuvan Shankar Raja.
Veene Venkatagiriyappa was the son of Venkataramappa, a scholar in the court of the Maharaja of Mysooru.
Veene Venkatagiriyappa was born on the 26, April 1887 at Heggadadevanakote in the modern Mysooru district.
Later, Veene Venkatagiriyappa had the opportunity to learn from the great man Veene Venkatagiriyappa.
Veene Sheshanna was impressed by the young man 's talent and taught Veene Sheshanna wholeheartedly.
Veene Sheshanna compiled, in twenty volumes, a collection of Carnatic classical compositions rendered using the western musical notation.
Veene Sheshanna also taught music in the Maharani 's Girls High School in Mysooru.
Veene Sheshanna was also appointed the director of the musical examinations conducted by the then Mysooru state.
Doreswamy Iyengar is reputed to have been an excellent teacher and a very generous man.
Doreswamy Iyengar died in 1951, in abject poverty because of the latter quality.
Sangita Samaya, by S Krishnamurthy.
A Tillana uses tala-like phrases in the pallavi and anupallavi, and lyrics in the charanam.
Some have theorized that Some is based on the Hindustani tarana.
Khamas or Kamas is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Carnatic is a janya ragam from the 28th melakarta scale Harikambhoji.
Carnatic is a janya scale, as Carnatic does not have all the seven swaras in the ascending scale.
It is a scale that evokes Shringara rasa.
It is suitable for javali type compositions.
Structure and Lakshana.
Khamas is an asymmetric ragam that does not contain rishabham in the ascending scale.
It is a vakra-shadava-sampurna ragam.
Its structure is as follows :.
For the details of the notations and terms, see swaras in Carnatic music.
Originally, Khamas was an upanga raga.
Later with the usage in javalis and other later compositions, the bhashanga type of Khamas came into use.
Kakali nishadam is introduced as anya swara occasionally.
According to Muthuswami Dikshitar school of music, Khamas is a sampurna raga with no zig-zag notes.
Khamaj of Hindustani Music closely resembles Khamas raga.
The Hindi film song ` Tere Mere Milan Ki ' from the movie Abhimaan is based on Khamaj.
There are many compositions set to Khamas ragam.
Here are some popular kritis composed in this ragam.
Lalgudi Vijayalakshmi is a well-known Carnatic violinist, vocalist and composer.
Lalgudi Vijayalakshmi was born in Chennai to violin maestro, Lalgudi Jayaraman.
Lalgudi Vijayalakshmi brother is also a noted violinist, G.J.R.Krishnan.
Lalgudi Vijayalakshmi debuted in 1979.
Lalgudi Vijayalakshmi travels extensively on musical tours all over the world.
Lalgudi Vijayalakshmi style like Lalgudi Vijayalakshmi fathers gayaka style closest to vocal rendition.
Lalgudi Vijayalakshmi performs a lot of duets with Lalgudi Vijayalakshmi brother, a violin player.
Sangeetha Kalasarathy, is the title awarded yearly by Parthasarathy Swami Sabha for Carnatic Music expert.
Sangeetha Kalasarathy carries a shawl, a citation, a medallion with a cash purse of Rs.
Jalarnavam is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Carnatic is the 38th Melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
Carnatic is called Jaganmohanam in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 2nd ragam in the 7th chakra Rishi.
The mnemonic name is the 7th chakra Rishi.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ra ga mi pa dha ni.
The mnemonic phrase structure is as follows :.
As Carnatic is a melakarta ragam, by definition Carnatic is a sampoorna ragam.
Carnatic is the prati madhyamam equivalent of Ratnangi, which is the 2nd melakarta.
Jalarnavam has a minor janya ragam associated with Carnatic.
See List of janya ragams for full list of ragams associated with Jalarnavam and other melakarta ragams.
A few compositions set to this scale are :.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Only these ragams have a gap of 3 notes anywhere in Only these ragams scale, between G1 to M2.
Such a gap does not occur in any other melakarta by definition.
Natabhairavi is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Natabhairavi is the 20th melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system.
Natabhairavi corresponds to the natural minor scale of western music system.
Natabhairavi corresponds to the Asavari thaat of Hindustani music.
In the Muthuswami Dikshitar school this ragam is called Nariritigowla.
Natabhairavi is known to be a ragam that incites feelings of grandeur and devotion in the listeners.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 2nd ragam in the 4th chakra Veda.
The mnemonic name is Veda-Sri.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ri gi ma pa dha ni.
The mnemonic phrase structure is as follows :.
Structure and Lakshana . is a sampoorna ragam - ragam having all 7 swarams.
Structure and Lakshana . is the shuddha madhyamam equivalent of Shanmukhapriya, which is the 56th melakarta.
Nariritigowla is the 20th Melakarta in the original list compiled by Venkatamakhin.
The notes used in the scale are the same, but the scales have vakra prayoga.
Natabhairavi has a number of popular janya ragams such as Bhairavi, Anandabhairavi, Saramati, Jaunpuri, Hindolam and Jayanthasree.
See List of janya ragams for a full list of Natabhairavi janya ragams.
Sri Valli Devasena pathe is a popular composition in Natabhairavi, composed by Papanasam Sivan.
Parulaseva by Poochi Srinivasa Iyengar is another well known composition in this ragam.
Upacaharamu jeseva, composed by Thyagaraja is also popular.
Muthuswami Dikshitar s composition Sri Neelotpalanayike is set to Nariritigowla.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Natabhairavi notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields 5 other major melakarta ragams, namely, Kalyani, Kalyani, Sankarabharanam, ,.
Hanumatodi, Kharaharapriya and Harikambhoji.
For further details and an illustration of Graha bhedam of this ragam refer Graha bhedam on Kalyani, Sankarabharanam,.
Venkatamakhin composed geethams and prabandhas, as well as 24 ashtapadis in praise of Lord Thyagaraja of Tiruvarur.
Venkatamakhin was the son of Govinda Dikshita, a Kannada Brahmin from Mysore.
Govinda Dikshita himself was a scholar and musicologist, as well as a minister in the kingdom of Thanjavur.
Venkatamakhin received his formal training under his elder brother, Yagnanarayana Dikshita.
Shamalangi or Shyamalangi is a ragam in Carnatic music.
It is the 55th melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
It is called in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 1st ragam in the 10th chakra Disi.
The mnemonic name is Disi-Pa.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ri gi mi pa dha na.
The mnemonic phrase structure is as follows :.
Shamalangis swaras are chathusruthi rishabham, sadharana gandharam, prati madhyamam, shuddha dhaivatham and shuddha nishadham.
As it is a melakarta ragam, by definition it is a sampoorna ragam.
It is the prati madhyamam equivalent of Jhankaradhwani, which is the 19th melakarta scale.
Shamalangi has a couple of minor janya ragams associated with it.
See List of janya ragams for janya ragams associated with Shamalangi.
A few compositions set to Shamalangi ragam are :.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Shamalangis notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields 2 minor melakarta ragams Ganamoorti and Vishwambari.
For further details and an illustration refer Graha bhedam on Ganamoorti.
Anandan Sivamani, popularly known as S. M. Anandan, a Chennai, is a percussionist based in India.
S. M. Anandan, a Chennai plays many instruments including drums, octoban, darbuka, udukai, and kanjira.
S. M. Anandan, a Chennai performed drumming during the IPL Championships in 2008 and 2010.
S. M. Anandan, a Chennai is the son of S. M. Anandan, a Chennai - based percussionist.
S. M. Anandan, a Chennai began drumming at the age of seven.
S. M. Anandan, a Chennai was inspired by Noel Grant and Billy Cobham.
S. M. Anandan, a Chennai has played for M.S.Viswanathan, Illayaraja, A R A. R. Rahman and others.
In 1990, S. M. Anandan, a Chennai shared the stage with Billy Cobham at Mumbais Rang Bhavan.
S. M. Anandan, a Chennai has stated that S. P. Balasubrahmanyam is S. P. Balasubrahmanyam godfather.
S. M. Anandan, a Chennai has since collaborated with several musicians including Louis Banks.
Shivamani has a band called Asia Electrik with Niladri Kumar, Louiz Banks and Ravi Chari.
Shivamani also plays at another world music band named Silk & Shrada.
S. M. Anandan, a Chennai has played drums for many film score composers hailing from Tamil Nadu.
, Guru, Kabul Express and Rockstar.
Some of the songs that he has contributed to include Kadhal Rojave, Pudhu Vellai Malai Chaiya Chaiya and Nadaan Parinde.
S. M. Anandan, a Chennai has performed in Dubai, Moscow, New York, Doha and Toronto.
S. M. Anandan, a Chennai has also worked on Galli Galli Sim Sim, an educational series on Pogo and Cartoon Network.
S. M. Anandan, a Chennai is the recipient of Kalaimamani award announced by the Tamil Nadu Government in 2009.
Manakkal Rangarajan is a Carnatic music singer who hails from the village of Manakkal in Trichy District.
Manakkal Rangarajan father was the late Santhana Krishna Bhagavathar.
He has been singing for the past six decades and is still performing past his 80th year.
He is a specialist in brigas, rare ragas and pallavis.
Manakkal Rangarajan has performed at Saint Tyagaraja music festival at Thiruvaiyaru for the past sixty years without a gap.
Manakkal Rangarajan is the only musician who has sung in AIR Chennai since its inception without repeating a single song.
Rama Ravi is a Carnatic vocalist and recipient of the Sangita Kala Acharya award from the Madras Music Academy.
Rama Ravi was born to Thulasi and M.R. Subramania Iyer, on 12 February 1943 in Chennai.
Rama Ravi has a Bachelors degree and a Masters degree in Indian Music from Stella Maris College in Chennai.
Rama Ravi M.Litt dissertation was titled Graces Figuring in South Indian Music.
Rama Ravi has also studied the Dhanammal school of music with T. Brinda, T. Muktha and music historian T. Sankaran.
Rama Ravi is also trained in Hindustani music having studied under Vinay Chandra Mudgalya.
Rama Ravi has also studied the veena and mridangam.
Performances and awards.
Rama Ravi has performed in Sangeet Sammelan recitals, and has also appeared in national programs on Doordarshan and All India Radio.
Rama Ravi was also a part of the Carnatic music camp organized by the International Foundation for Carnatic Music.
Rama Ravi is a Grade A artist of the All India Radio.
Rama Ravi is married to S. Ravi ; their daughter, Nandita Ravi, is also a Carnatic vocalist.
Development of Carnatic music.
Later, Vidyaranya s Sangitasara, Ventamakhin s Chaturdandi Prakashika and Chaturkallinatha s Sangitaratnakara further refined these traditions.
With the rise of Vaishnavism and the Haridasa movement came prominent composers from Karnataka like Purandaradasa, Kanakadasa, Vijaya Dasa and Jagannathadasa.
The Wodeyars of Mysore were great patrons of the arts.
In earlier times, Sangeeta Shaastra followed the  Guru-Shishya  tradition, and there did not exist any written text.
First classical music began as abhyasa, and South Indian classical music was only later that shaastras were formed.
For a considerable period of time it was one of the only authoritative treatise for the whole of India.
After that, independent growth of classical music occurred across different parts of India, in different forms.
He hailed from Devagiri, which was at the time a part of Karnataka.
Later, in 1350 CE, South Indian classical music obtained a well-defined structure through the works of Maadhava and VidhyaraNya.
Carnatic music saw renewed growth during the Vijayanagar Empire by the Kannada Haridasa movement of Vyasaraja, Purandara Dasa, Kanakadasa and others.
Others of the Haridasa movement, helped shaped the music.
of their time and prepared for the future by influencing some of the composers who came after them.
the influence of Purandaradasa.
Kshetrajna who wrote  Shrungaara padas  was also living at this time.
During the time of VidhyaraNaya, there were 15 meLakarta raagas, which became 22 during the time of Venkatamakhin.
The development of Carnatic music in Karnataka, from Sharngadeva to Venkatamakhin, resulted in further expansion and establishment of Carnatic music.
, is a ragam in Carnatic music.
It is an audava ragam.
It is a janya ragam, as it does not have all the seven swaras.
Structure and Lakshana.
is a symmetric ragam that does not contain rishabham or nishadam.
It is a pentatonic scale.
Its structure is as follows :.
ragam has a few compositions in classical music.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
s notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields another popular pentatonic ragam, Hamsadhwani.
For more details and illustration of this concept refer Graha bhedam on Hamsadhwani.
Sri Vyasatirtha also brought the Haridasa cult, historically believed to be propagated by Sri Narahari Tirtha, into limelight.
Sri Vyasatirtha belonged to the Dvaita school of Sri Madhvacharya.
Sri Vyasatirtha, along with Jayatirtha, helped systematize Dvaita into an established school of Vedic thought.
He was a master at debate and dialogue in logic and philosophy.
the Vyasayogicharita was one of the foremost dialecticians in the history of Indian philosophy.
Channapatna Rallanna Sumati father Rallanna Sumati, of kashyapa gotra, was the youngest of the six sons of Ramacharya.
By blessings of Brahmanya Tirtha of Channapatna Rallanna Sumati had three children born to him - a girl and two boys.
The youngest was Yatiraja the future Vyasaraja swamin.
Sri Vyasatirtha did not had any time studying much under Sri Vyasatirtha Guru Brahmanya.
It was probably here that Sri Vyasatirtha acquired Sri Vyasatirtha deep erudition in the systems of Sankara, Ramanuja, Bhatta and others.
After the completion of Sri Vyasatirtha studies at Kanchi, Sri Vyasatirtha went over to the seat of Shripadaraja at Mulbhagal.
There Sri Vyasatirtha spent many years in study and meditation.
Sri Vyasatirtha is believed to have studied for several years under Shripadaraja.
Sri Vyasatirtha was extremely influential in the Vijayanagar Empire.
Sri Vyasatirtha headed the Tirupati Temple during the time 1486-1498.
The accession of Shri Krishnadevaraya in 1509 opened up a new chapter of the glory in the life of Sri Vyasatirtha.
The king had the greatest regard and respect for Sri Vyasatirtha and regarded King as nothing less than King kuladevata.
This is very beautifully narrated by the poet Somanatha in the poet Somanatha biography on Sri Vyasatirtha.
The description points unmistakably to Sri Vyasatirtha.
Nunizs remarks are fully corroborated by Somanathas biography.
The data is given by Shri Puranadadasa in one of his songs.
His mortal remains are entombed at Nava Brundavana, an island on Tungabhadra river, about half a mile east of Anegondi.
Sri Vyasatirtha was almost the second Founder of the system of Madhva.
There is a tradition that when the North Indian Logician Pakshadhara Mishra visited Mulbhagal, he had spoken most appreciatively of Vyasatirtha.
Shri Vyasatirtha was a thinker of high order.
The biography of Sri Vyasatirtha gives several accounts of Sri Vyasatirtha kind-heartedness.
Sri Vyasatirtha allowed Sri Vyasatirtha preachings to take their gentle course of persuasion and disliked proselytization for the sake of numbers.
Sri Vyasatirtha did not misuse Sri Vyasatirtha influence with Kings to make Sri Vyasatirtha faith the state religion.
This attitude deserves to be contrasted with that of the Shrivaishnavas, reported in the prappannamruta.
Vyasathirta installed 732 Hanuman idols all over India, both Purandaradasa.
Few of them to be named are :.
The influence of Sri Vyasatirtha was felt far beyond the limits of Karnataka, in the heart of distant Bengal.
There was a huge family of students to Sri Vyasatirtha Tirtha.To name a few are Purandaradasa, Kanakadasa, Kanakadasa,.
Vadiraja Tirtha, Sreenivasa Thirtha, Vijayendra Thirtha, Somanatha Kavi, Govinda Wodeyar.
The Contemporaries of Sri Vyasatirtha were :.
Sri Vyasatirtha famous works include -.
Sattarkavilasa is a book known to us only through cross reference.
The place of Sri Vyasatirtha in the Dvaita philosophy and Dvaita system.
As Shri BNK Sharma says, Sri Vyasatirtha is the prince of the Dialecticians of the Dvaita systems.
The tradition rightly regards him, with Madhva and Jayatirtha as constituting the trinity of authorities on Madhva siddhanta.
The political influence of the Madhva school also rose to its highest level under Sri Vyasatirtha.
M. S. Gopalakrishnan.
M.S. Gopalakrishnan, aka M.S. Gopalakrishnan, was a violinist in the field of Carnatic music.
Life and career.
M.S. Gopalakrishnan daughter, Dr M. Narmadha, is also a violinist.
Gopalakrishnan died in Chennai, India, India, at 2 am on January 3, 2013, at the age of 81.
He was survived by his wife Meenakshi, his daughters M. Narmadha and Latha, and son Suresh.
M.S. Gopalakrishnan style includes one-finger playing and a thematic development on single-string octaves.
Violinist Yehudi Menuhin said of a Gopalakrishnans playing : US have not heard such violin in all US travels !.
How superbly this young Indian is playing our instrument.
Devagandhari is a raga in Indian classical music.
It is also there in the Sikh tradition of northern India and is part of the Guru Granth Sahib.
In Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . structure is as follows :.
The notes used in this ragam are shadjam, chatushruti rishabham, antara gandharam, shuddha madhyamam, panchamam, chatushruti dhaivatam and kakili nishadam.
This ragam sometimes includes the kaishika nishadam.
The closest raga to this one is Arabhi.
Some of the things that makes Arabhi different are :.
Here are some more compositions set to Devagandhari.
In Sikh tradition.
In the Sikh tradition from northern India it is part of the Guru Granth Sahib.
The composition in this raga appear on a total of 10 pages from page numbers 527 to 537.
Today Devagandhari is a rare, little known, ancient raga.
Devagandhari performance time is the morning hours.
Historically it has had three forms ; the less ornamented type is described here.
In the Ragmala, Devagandhari is a ragini of Malkaunsa.
Today Ragmala belongs to the Asavari thata.
Ragmala mood is one of prayerful supplication presenting a heroic effect.
The texts set to this raga reveal a heroic search for these qualities which lead one to the Lord.
This raga was used primarily by Guru Arjan.
Forty-Seven hymns were composed to Forty-Seven including three by Guru Tegh Bahadar and six by Guru Ram Das.
Thrissur C. Rajendran.
Thrissur C. Rajendran is a noted Carnatic Violinist from Kerala Kalamandalam, India.
Birth and Initiation to Music.
Nearing five decades, his artistic career spans as an accomplished accompanist and soloist at various prestigious cultural organizations and music festivals.
Career in All India Radio.
He debuted in All India Radio by accompanying Carnatic great Late.
K.V.Narayanaswamy maiden performance in Doordarshan was by accompanying another great musician Late.Pudukkode Krishnamoorthy.
Awards and Accolades.
Several awards have adorned K.V.Narayanaswamy since 1979 including the Best Junior Violinist award from Madras Music Academy.
Later, several awards have followed suit to adore K.V.Narayanaswamy artistic excellence.
He has also visited several countries catering the legacy of Indian Classical Music with proficiency and talent.
He has been the cultural ambassador at the UNESCO hall, Paris in connection with the 50th year celebration of UNESCO.
Rajendran also has performed at several prestigious centres in France.
As an accompanying Artist and a Composer.
an accompanying Artist accomplishments as acknowledged accompanist includes doyens like Late Chembai Vaidyanatha Bhagavathar, Late, Late.Dr.
Neyyattinkara Vasudevan, T. N. Seshagopalan, T. V. Sankaranarayanan, Rudrapattanam Brothers and many more seasoned performers which include musicians of three generations.
Neyyattinkara Vasudevan was on the Staff of All India Radio from 1975 to 2009 June 1949.
Neyyattinkara Vasudevan domain of expertise is enriching the raga bhava and the lyrical excellence through musical embellishment.
Neyyattinkara Vasudevan sternly submits that Neyyattinkara Vasudevan is a devoted practitioner of music perennially.
Govinda Rao Harishankar, was a player of the kanjira, a tambourine-like frame drum used in the Carnatic music of South India.
Govinda Rao Harishankar received Govinda Rao Harishankar initial training under Govinda Rao Harishankar father Govinda Rao.
Govinda Rao Harishankar later learnt under Ramanathapuram C S Murugabhoopathy & then under Palghat Mani Iyer.
Govinda Rao Harishankar was a staff artist of the All India Radio, Chennai.
He performed on several albums including Laya Chithra, Sruthilaya, and Grand Finale.
He is considered by many as the greatest kanjira performer to date.
His main students are Bangalore Amrit, C.P.Vyasa Vittala, Nerkunam Shankar & S.Thyagarajan.
Multiple sources say he had albinism, though many photos show him with dyed-dark hair.
K. V. Narayanaswamy.
Early life and background.
KV Narayanaswamy was born into a family of illustrious musicians and artists.
In return Viswam Bhagavatar was bestowed with government aid and hereditary royal privileges.
Viswam Bhagavatars son, Narayana Bhagavatar continued Viswam Bhagavatars son fathers legacy.
Viswam Bhagavatars son son was violin maestro, Kollengode Viswanathayyar, KVNs father.
K.V.Narayanaswamy learned basic music lessons under K.V.Narayanaswamy father and grandfather.
After studying in Palghat till the fifth form, K.V.Narayanaswamy moved to Coimbatore, where K.V.Narayanaswamy briefly dabbled in theater.
K.V.Narayanaswamy even managed a role as the young Kanappan in the movie Kannappa Nayanar.
The movie bombed at the box office.
KVN first began extensive training under Mridangam maestro, Padma Bhushan, Palghat Mani Iyer.
Viswanatha Bhagavatar was however very keen that KVN should train under Sangeetha Kalanidhi.
Mani Iyer soon judged KVN to be ready for gurukulavasam under Ariyakudi and in 1942, K.V.Narayanaswamy took the giant step.
Accompanied by doyens Palghat Mani Iyer and Papa Venkataramayya, this concert proved to be a milestone in Narayanaswamys career.
The training under Palghat Mani Iyer allowed K.V.Narayanaswamy to develop a solid knowledge of rhythmic nuances.
K.V.Narayanaswamy, Palghat R. Raghu and violin maestro T.N.Krishnan would soon become a frequent and much admired combination on stage.
K.V.Narayanaswamy was intimately connected to the Travancore Royal Family following K.V.Narayanaswamy skillful rendition of Swathi Thirunal Rama Varma s Navaratri compositions.
Another landmark in KVNs life came in 1964 when K.V.Narayanaswamy participated in the East-West Encounter concerts in New Delhi.
This was followed by a widely acclaimed concert at the Edinburgh Festival in Scotland in 1965.
For nine months KV Narayanaswamy taught at the university and gave performances all over North America.
Musical style and Song Repertoire.
Though Narayanaswamys singing bore KV Narayanaswamy master Ariyakudis Bani, over the years he evolved a unique style of his own.
Strict classicism and blemish-less singing are some of the obvious facets of his music.
Strict adherence to Shruthi, lyrical purity and a poignant rendition were distinctive features of KVNs music.
In 1948 KVN married Palghat Mani Iyer s cousin Annapoorni.
KVNs leading disciples had three daughters and a son : Muktha, Lalitha, Viswanathan and Ramaa.
By a stroke of misfortune cousin Annapoorni died in 1962.
In 1965 Narayanaswamy married Padma Narayanaswamy, a talented musician and disciple who continues to train her husbands students in his style.
Their daughter Anuradha is a trained vocalist and television actor.
See also : Carnatic music.
Ustad Faiyaz Khan is a Tabla player of international repute and belongs to the Delhi Gharana.
Ustad Faiyaz Khan was born in 1934 at Sikar, Rajasthan, in a family of musicians.
Nazir Khan Ustad Faiyaz Khan father, was a sarangi and tabla - player at the court of the Maharaja of Karoli.
Munir Khan Nazir Khan his father elder brother is a well-known sarangi player.
Munir Khan his elder brother initial training was under Ustad Hidayat Khan.
Ustad Faiyaz Khan has also received training in mridangam from Ramnad Ishwaran.
Ustad Faiyaz Khan began Ustad Faiyaz Khan career in All India Radio Jaipur in 1955.
In 1958 Ustad Faiyaz Khan moved to A.I.R Delhi.
Ustad Faiyaz Khan retired as a staff artist from there in 1993.
Ustad Faiyaz Khan has accompanied many great stalwarts as well as has performed as soloist.
Ustad Faiyaz Khan also has travelled the world extensively, for performances.
The so called Thanjavur Thavil or Tavil is a barrel shaped drum from South India.
It is used in temple, folk and Carnatic music, often accompanying the nadaswaram.
The thavil and the nadaswaram are essential components of traditional festivals and ceremonies in South India.
In folk music contexts, a pair of wider, slimmer sticks is sometimes used.
Thanjavur is famous for thavil, so called Thanjavur Thavil.
In Kollywood Filmi songs thavils are mostly used, Notable movies : Thillaanaa Mohanambal, Paruthiveeran, Karagattakaran.
The thavil consists of a cylindrical shell hollowed out of a solid block of jackfruit wood.
Layers of animal skin are stretched across the two sides of the shell using hemp hoops attached to the shell.
The larger face is higher in pitch than the smaller face.
Methods of use / Posture.
The instrument is either played while sitting, or hung by a cloth strap from the shoulder of the player.
The right head is played with the right hand, wrist and fingers.
The player usually wears thumb caps on all the fingers of the right hand, made of hardened glue from maida flour.
The left head is played with a short, thick stick made from the wood of the portia tree.
Some master thavil players :.
Dhirasankarabharanam, commonly known as Sankarabharanam, is a raga in Carnatic music.
Carnatic is the 29th Melakarta raga in the 72 Melakarta raga system of Carnatic music.
Since this raga has many Gamakas, many Gamakas is glorified as Sarva Gamaka Manika Rakti Ragam in Telugu.
many Gamakas is known as Bilawal in the Hindustani music system.
The Western equivalent is the C major scale, Ionian mode.
Hence this raga is one of the most popular scales across the world, known with different names in different musical styles.
Its nature is mellifluous and smooth.
This raga offers a large scope for compositions.
It is ideal for a melodious, but still laid back majestic presentation.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 5th raga in the 5th Chakra Bana.
The mnemonic name is Bana-Ma.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ri gu ma pa dhi nu.
Its structure is as follows :.
The notes in this scale are shadjam, chatushruti rishabham, antara gandharam, shuddha madhyamam, panchamam, chatushruti dhaivatam and Kakali Nishadam.
As it is a Melakarta raga, by definition it is a Sampurna raga.
It is the Shuddha Madhyamam equivalent of 65th Melakarta raga Kalyani.
Due to the even spacing of svaras, many janya ragas can be derived from Samkarabharanam.
It is one of the melakarta ragas that has high number of Janya ragas associated with it.
See List of Janya ragas for full list of ragas associated with Samkarabharanam.
Sankarabharanam has been decorated with compositions by almost all composers.
A few of the compositions are listed here.
Muthuswami Dikshitar also has a list of 22 Nottu Svara compositions, based on Western Major Scale notes to Muthuswami Dikshitar credit.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this raga.
Refer table below for illustration of this concept.
Notes on above table.
The shadjam is fixed by the artist as per the vocal range or the instruments base frequency.
All the other svarams are relative to this shadjam, falling into a geometric progression-like frequency pattern.
The 7th Graha bhedam of Samkarabharanam has both madhyamams and no panchamam and hence will not be considered a valid melakarta.
The swaras are regularly spaced in these ragas.
Hence these six ragas give very good melody, scope for elaboration, experimentation and exploration of phrases.
In practice, Natabhairavi is not elaborated extensively much.
One of these 4 ragas is sung as the main raga in a concert quite often.
Mysore V. Srikanth is a Carnatic music violinist.
Mysore Srikanth is a violinist in the field of Carnatic music.
Mysore V. Srikanth is a senior disciple of Vidwan Sri.
H.K. Narasimha Murthy of Mysore and follows the Parur style of fingering.
H.K. Narasimha started learning Violin at a very young age and has undergone rigorous training for more than twenty years.
Mysore V. Srikanth has been giving performances from Mysore V. Srikanth fifteenth year.
Mysore V. Srikanth is also performing with talented young artists like Abhishek Raghuram, T.V.Ramprasadh, Shashank, Gayathri Girish, Sikkil Gurucharan & others.
Mysore V. Srikanth has been featured in all prestigious Music Sabhas & Organizations throughout the country.
Awards and titles.
Mysore V. Srikanth, graded artist of AIR & Doordarshan, performs regularly for All India Radio, Doordarshan and other T.V. Channels.
Mysore V. Srikanth has also performed for National Program of Music of Doordarshan.
& All India Radio.
Mysore V. Srikanth has recorded many commercial CDs & cassettes with many great artists.
Mysore V. Srikanth has won a number of prizes, accolades and appreciation from rasikas and critics.
Mysore V. Srikanth was adjudged as the Best Violinist by :.
Krishna Gana Sabha - 1995.
The Indian Fine Arts Society -- Dec 2000 Music Season.
Karnataka Gana Kala Parishath - Young Musicians ' Conference - 2001.
The Music Academy - Dec 2002 Music Season.
The Indian Fine Arts Society - Dec 2007 - Best Senior Violinist.
The Indian Fine Arts Society - Dec 2008 - Best Senior Violinist.
Mysore V. Srikanth has been conferred with the title Kala Praveen in Feb 2002 at Bangalore.
Gangeyabhushani is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Gangeyabhushani is the 33rd Melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
Gangeyabhushani is called Gangatarangini in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 3rd ragam in the 6th chakra Rutu.
The mnemonic name is Rutu-Go.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ru gu ma pa dha nu.
Its structure is as follows :.
The notes present in this scale are shatsruthi rishabham, antara gandharam, shuddha madhyamam, shuddha dhaivatham, kakali nishadham.
As Gangeyabhushani is a melakarta ragam, by definition Gangeyabhushani is a sampoorna ragam.
Gangeyabhushani is the shuddha madhyamam equivalent of Dhatuvardani, which is the 69th melakarta.
Gangeyabhushani currently has no janya ragams associated with Gangeyabhushani.
See List of janya Ragams to lookup all janya ragams.
A few compositions set to Gangeyabhooshani are :.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Gangeyabhushanis notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields Neetimati, a minor melakarta ragam.
For further details and an illustration refer Graha bhedam on Gangeyabhushani.
Gourimanohari or Gowrimanohari is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Gourimanohari is the 23rd Melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
The 23rd melakarta ragam as per Muthuswami Dikshitar school of music is.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 5th ragam in the 4th chakra Veda.
The mnemonic name is Veda-Ma.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ri gi ma pa dhi nu.
Its structure is as follows :.
The notes used in this scale are shadjam, chathusruthi rishabham, sadharana gandharam, shuddha madhyamam, panchamam, chathusruthi dhaivatham and kakali nishadham.
It is a sampurna ragam - a ragam that has all seven swaras.
It is the shuddha madhyamam equivalent of Dharmavati, which is the 59th melakarta.
It has a few minor janya ragams associated with it.
See List of janya ragams to lookup all ragams associated with List of janya ragams.
The following are a few popular compositions in this ragam.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Gourimanoharis notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields 3 other major melakarta ragams, namely, Vachaspati, Natakapriya and Charukesi.
For further details and an illustration see Graha bhedam on Vachaspati.
Hindusthanis Bhairavi is a janya ragam in Carnatic music.
This is one of the ancient ragams, said to have been prevalent about 1500 years ago.
There are numerous compositions in this ragam.
Though a Raga called Hindusthanis Bhairavi also exists in Hindusthani music, Hindusthani is very different from the Carnatic version.
Hindusthanis Bhairavi, in terms of a Raga called Bhairavi also aroha and avaroha alone, corresponds to Carnatic musics Thodi.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is considered a janya of the 20th melakarta Natabhairavi.
Structure and Lakshana . structure is as follows :.
The other set of arohana and avarohana used is :.
The notes used are chathusruthi rishabham, sadharana gandharam, shuddha madhyamam,.
chathusruthi dhaivatham & shuddha dhaivatham and kaishika nishadham.
Note the use of both dhaivathams, chathusruthi in and shuddha in.
In descent as well as in the phrase P D N D P the D1 of the parent scale is used.
Only R2 and M1 can be prolonged without gamakam.
The gamakam on G ends in R.
In descent the phrase M P G R is also used and G2 slides from M1 and oscillates.
The deft use of gamakams in handling G2 N2 D2 and D1 gives the raagam its flavour.
Elaboration and related ragas.
Hindusthanis Bhairavi is one of the most popular ragas on the concert stage, due to its very wide scope for improvisation.
The nishada, an important jeeva swara, can be rendered with varying degrees of gamaka, depending on which daivatha is used.
The weight of this raga and the lack of vakra sancharas make brighas and slower phrases equally appealing.
This characteristic also means that the raga is well-suited to thanam, kanakku, and sarvalaghu swaras.
Hindusthanis Bhairavi is also one of the most common ragas in which ragam-thanam-pallavi is rendered, due to the scope for elaboration.
There is a near-infinite number of compositions in this raga, which can be sung at any time of day.
Ragas which have similar murchanas and/or anya swara patterns to Hindusthanis Bhairavi include Manji, Mukhari, and Huseni.
Hindusthanis Bhairavi has been decorated with numerous compositions by almost all composers.
Viriboni varnam in ata talam by Pacchimiriam Adiyappa is commonly sung at the beginning of a concert and is very popular.
Given below are a few very popular compositions among the 100s in this ragam.
Marimutthu Pillai was a contemporary of Arunachala Kavi.
Marimutthu Pillai popular compositions are Orukal Sivachidambaram and Kalai tookki etc.
Sri Krishna Leela Tarangini.
Sri Krishna Leela Tarangini is a tarangini or a Sanskrit opera authored by Narayana Teertha.
The songs are in chaste Sanskrit and clear diction and are rich in poetic quality.
Sri Krishna Leela Tarangini . consists of 12 Tarangams and encapsulates 153 songs, 302 slokams and 31 choornikaas.
Teertha followed Veda VyAsa 's Bhagavatam and concentrated on the 10th skandam.
The composition are on the life of the Hindu god Lord Krishna.
Narayan Theertha uses various literary and musical forms such as songs, prose passages, Slokas, Dwipadis, etc.
The songs are popularly called Tarangas means waves.
The lyrics are simple yet beautiful and effective.
The Astapadis of Jayadeva are said to be the inspiration.
Legend has it that the inspiration to compose this piece occurred when Jayadeva was along the banks of Naducauvery.
A divine voice asked Jayadeva to follow a boar to wherever it led Jayadeva.
The varaha led The varaha to Bhupatirajapuram, which came to be known as ` Varahur later.
The people of the village knew that a maha-purusha was coming.
Aradhana sabhas by Narayana Tirthar Trust are held annually in honour of the Tarangini.
G. J. R. Krishnan.
Lalgudi G.J.R.Krishnan is a well-known Carnatic violinist, vocalist and composer.
Early life and background.
G. J. R. Krishnan was born in Chennai to violin maestro, Lalgudi Jayaraman.
G. J. R. Krishnan debuted in 1973 and became popular.
G. J. R. Krishnan . travels extensively on musical tours all over the world.
G. J. R. Krishnan . style like G. J. R. Krishnan . fathers is the gayaka style closest to vocal rendition.
The Sarasvati vina is an Indian plucked string instrument.
Sarasvati is named after the Hindu goddess Saraswati, who is usually depicted holding or playing the instrument.
Also known as raghunatha veena, , Malayalam : viinn,  is used mostly in Carnatic Indian classical music.
One who plays the veena is referred to as a vainika.
One who plays the veena is one of other major types of veena popular today.
The others include chitra veena, vichitra veena and rudra veena.
Some people play traditional music, others play contemporary music.
The veena has a recorded history that dates back to the approximately 1500 BCE.
The Jya ghosha is referred to in the ancient Atharvaveda.
Eventually, the archers bow paved the way for the musical bow.
Twisted bark, strands of grass and grass root, vegetable fibre and animal gut were used to create the first strings.
Over the veenas evolution and modifications, more particular names were used to help distinguish the instruments that followed.
The yazh was an ancient harp-like instrument that was also considered a veena.
As is seen in many Hindu temple sculptures and paintings, the early veenas were played vertically.
Prior to Raghunatha Nayak time, the number of frets on the veena were less and also movable.
- Padmabhooshan Prof. P. Sambamurthy, musicologist.
The Saraswati veena developed from Kinnari Veena.
Pitapuram in East Godavari District and Bobbili in vijayanagaram District of Andhrapradesh are famous for Veena makers.
Sangeeta Ratnakara calls it Ekatantri Veena and gives the method for its construction.
Descendants of Tansen reserved Rudra Veena for family and out of reverence began calling Tansen the Saraswati Veena.
If the veena is built from a single piece of wood the Tanjore veena is called veena.
Two rosettes, formerly of ivory, now of plastic or horn, are on the top board of the resonator.
All seven strings today are of steel, with the lower strings either solid thick gauge wire or round wound.
The veena is played by sitting cross-legged with the instrument held tilted slightly away from the player.
The drone strings are played with the little finger.
The veenas large resonator is placed on the floor, beyond the right thigh.
The photo of Veenai Dhanammal more accurately illustrates how the veena is held than the more fanciful Ravi Varma painting.
Religious associations within Hinduism.
The patron Hindu Goddess of learning and the arts, Saraswati, is often depicted seated upon a swan playing a veena.
Lord Shiva is also depicted playing or holding a vina in His form called Vinadhara, which means bearer of the vina.
Also, the great Hindu sage Narada was known as a veena maestro.
and refers to 19 different kinds of the Tanjore veena in Sangita Makarandha.
Many references to the veena are made in old Sanskrit and Tamil literature, and musical compositions.
The instruments neck is Shiva, the strings constitute Sanskrit poem Kumarasambhava consort, Parvati.
The bridge is Lakshmi, the secondary gourd is Brahma, the dragon head Vishnu.
And upon the resonating body is Saraswati.
Thus, the veena is the abode of divinity and the source of all happiness.
- R. Rangaramanuja Ayyangar.
Scholars are the Tanjavur Veena, Rudra veena, Vichitra veena, and Gottuvadhyam veena.
the Tanjore veena represents the system of Indian music.
Several instruments evolved in response to cultural changes in the country.
Communities of artists, scholars and craftsmen moved around and at times settled down.
Thus Veena craftsmen of Kolkata were famous for Veena craftsmen of Kolkata instruments.
Tone and acoustics.
Nobel Prize - winning physicist C.V. Raman has described the veena as having a unique construction.
The string terminations at both ends are curved and not sharp.
Also, the frets have much more curvature than any other instrument.
This design enables a continuous control over the string tension, which is important for glissandi.
The beeswax beneath the frets may act as a noise filter.
Konnokol is comparable in some respects to bol in Hindustani music, but allows the composition, performance or communication of rhythms.
Sri Thetakudi Harihara Subash Chandran is a well-known exponent.
Many musicians from a variety of traditions around the world have found konnakol useful in their own musical practice.
V. Selvaganesh - who plays alongside John McLaughlin in the group Remember Shakti - is another noted konnakol virtuoso.
Subash Chandran has released an instructional DVD on konnakol.
McLaughlin and Selvaganesh have released a separate instructional DVD on konnakol.
LOIRE is known for The trio J G Laya konnakol singing, as well.
Further, all the differences which still remain between Carnatic and north Indian rhythms apply equally to konnakol and tabla bols respectively.
The artist improvises within a structure that interrelates with the raga being played and within the talam preferred in the compositions.
The human voice has a direct and dramatic way of expressing the percussive aspects in music directly.
K. V. Krishna Prasad.
K. V. Krishna Prasad, also known as KP is a Carnatic music vocalist.
He has his family rooted in the town of Shringeri.
Krishna Prasad was born to Sri.
K N Venkatanarayana and Smt.
K V Chandrakala on January 29, 1988.
Venkatanarayana started learning Carnatic music at the age of 8 under the training of Vid.
Geetha, Vid.Swarnalatha and Vid.
M V Raghuram.
Later on Krishna Prasad started practicing under Vid.
Ganakalabhushana R. K. Padmanabha.
After one year of learning under Vid.
R. K. Padmanabha, Krishna Prasad gave his maiden concert.
He passed his Music Seniors Exam with university 3rd rank.
Rasikapriya is a ragam in Carnatic music.
It is the last melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
It is called Rasamanjari in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 6th ragam in the 12th chakra Aditya.
The mnemonic name is Aditya-Sha.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ru gu mi pa dhu nu.
The mnemonic phrase structure is as follows :.
As it is a melakarta ragam, by definition it is a sampoorna ragam.
It is the prati madhyamam equivalent of last suddha madhyamam melakarta, Chalanata, which is the 36th melakarta scale.
Rasikapriya has a few minor janya ragams associated with it.
See List of janya ragams for full list of scales associated with Rasikapriya.
Here are some compositions sung in concerts, set to Rasikapriya.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Rasikapriyas notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields 2 other major melakarta ragams, namely, Mayamalavagowla and Simhendramadhyamam.
For further details and an illustration refer Graha bhedam on Mayamalavagowla.
Lalitha Sivakumar is a prominent Carnatic music teacher and composer.
Lalitha Sivakumar was known for vocally accompanying Lalitha Sivakumar mother-in-law and leading Carnatic vocalist, the late D. K. Pattammal, in concerts.
Lalitha Sivakumar is also prominently known as the mother and guru of Nithyashree Mahadevan, a prominent vocalist in Indian music.
At the age of 18, Lalitha Sivakumar was married to I. Sivakumar, son of D. K. Pattammal.
The day after the wedding, Lalitha Sivakumar received received training in Carnatic music from D. K. Pattammal.
However, Lalitha Sivakumar career as a solo performer was brief, and Lalitha Sivakumar remained content vocally accompanying Lalitha Sivakumar guru.
Lalitha Sivakumar has composed, and set music to a number of kritis, tillanas, and bhajans, in a variety of Indian languages.
Other than Nithyasree Mahadevan, Lalitha Sivakumars disciples also include Lavanya Sundararaman, Maharajapuram Srinivasan, Niranjana Srinivasan, Pallavi Prasanna, Nalini Krishnan and others.
Shri Ramani Thiagarajan is an Indian musician.
Shri Ramani Thiagarajan is the son of the Carnatic flutist Dr. N. Ramani.
Sri Thiagarajan has performed over 2,000 concerts all over the world.
Shri Ramani Thiagarajan has also a large student following in India.
In addition, Shri Ramani Thiagarajan has accompanied on the violin and flute for all forms of classical dances of India.
Shri Ramani Thiagarajan recently taught music at the Singapore Indian Fine Arts Society.
Shri Ramani Thiagarajan is also an excellent Kanjira player and has accompanied many concerts on Kanjira.
A. K. C. Natarajan.
A. K. C. Natarajan is a carnatic music clarinet player.
A. K. C. Natarajan received a Sangeet Natak Akademi Award in 1994.
Trichur C. Narendran.
Thrissur C. Narendran is a renowned Mridangam artiste from Kerala, India.
Narendran was born to Late Venugopala Raja of Manakulam Palace and sister in an ambience of Music and Art.
Later it was Sri E P Narayana Pisharodi and Koduvayur Radhakrishnan who trained Narayana Pisharodi further.
Narendran had the rarest privileges to be one of the early disciples of Sri Palghat R Raghu from 1973.
Narendran has been exposed to the concert platform from a very early age of 10.
Stint with A.I.R.
A.I.R. was at the age of 17 that he won first prize in A I R Music competition.
In the Commercial CD.
He is now a Top rank artiste of All India Radio.
Awards and Accolades.
Narendran moved to Chennai in 1973.
He is now retired from All India Radio and settled in Chennai.
Smitha Madhav is an accomplished and performing Carnatic Classical Singer and Bharatanatyam Dancer.
Smitha Madhav is an eminent and versatile artist in both forms of these fine arts.
Smitha Madhav enthusiasm and energy to promote these fine arts is noteworthy.
Smitha Madhav has been trained in Bharatanatyam by Guru Nritya Choodamani Smt Rajeswari Sainath, the director of Sruthi Laya Kendra Natarajaalaya.
This institute was founded by one of the stalwarts and heavy weights in Carnatic Classical Music, Mrudangam maestro Karaikudi Mani.
Smitha Madhav is an empanelled artiste of the Indian Council for Cultural Relations.
Tours and Performances.
Smitha Madhav also choreographs on Smitha Madhav own and has to Smitha Madhav credit four major works.
Film and Television.
On television, Smitha Madhav has anchored several shows in multiple languages.
Awards and Recognitions.
Smithas work has been widely acknowledged and Smitha Madhav is the recipient of various prestigious awards.
Some of these are given below.
This tradition is reflected in the name This tradition ; Darbar is the Persian derived word in Hindi meaning court.
This tradition belongs to the Asavari thaat.
This tradition is also sometimes written as Durbari and Durbari.
In Hindustani classical music.
The ascension of aroha is in the lower and middle octaves.
In the avroha the note Ga komal is used in a weak manner and a slow vibrato on this note.
The association of the notes Ni and Pa sounds pleasing.
Other ragas in the Darbari Kanada family include Abhogi Kanada, Nayaki Kanada, Shahana Kanada, Kaushi Kanada and Adana.
In Carnatic music.
It is an ubhaya vakra sampurna ragam derived from the 20th melakarta ragam Natabhairavi.
Its arohana-avarohana structure is as follows :.
This scale uses the notes chatusruti rishabham, sadharana gandharam, shuddha madhyamam, shuddha dhaivatham, kaisiki nishadham.
Darbari Kanada kanada resembles Darbari Kanada ragam, and is suitable for Thillanas, Bhajans and other light melodies.
List of Film Songs based on Ragas.
M.K. Sankaran Namboothiri.
Sankaran Namboodiri is a Carnatic classical music vocalist from Kerala.
Sri Sankaran Namboodiri inaugural concert at the Music Academy was packed.
Sri Sankaran Namboodiri lives in Kochi and is also a well-known playback singer in Malayalam cinema.
Many Ganasabhas in Chennai as well as Kerala have honored Sri Sankaran Namboodiri.
Sri Sankaran Namboodiri has to Sri Sankaran Namboodiri credit several Cassettes and CDs released by HMV, Sangeetha, AVM, etc.
The Yakshagana bells or Yakshagana cymbal are a pair of finger bells made of a special alloy used in Yakshagana.
They are used by the singer to keep the tempo and rhythm of Yakshagana performance.
The pitch of the bells are very high and do not match the tonic of the singer.
Due to They high pitch usually singers use bells of any key.
Professional singers maintain and treasure Professional singers personal finger bells.
Methods of use.
There are techniques to produce at least three different sounds.
For fast rhythms less prominent hand is rolled to facilitate fast beating.
A closed hit of the bells produces a sound without any overtone and with sudden decay.
This stroke indicates a gap and is often used to indicate change in rhythm or tempo to other musicians.
Sheik Chinna Moulana.
Sheik Chinna Moulana popularly known as Sheik was a legendary Nadhaswaram Player in the Carnatic tradition.
Sheik Chinna Moulana hails from a family of Nadhaswaram Music.
Following is list of the doyens who contributed to Chinna Moulana 's tradition.
Vidhwan Adam Sahib - known for Vidhwan Adam Sahib expertise in the  Ragha - Devagandhari.
Vidhwan RasavAripalem Kasim sahib - deeply learned and could answer any doubts on music.
Kommur Pitcha sahib - enriched the art of Nadhaswaram.
The Kommur brothers Pentu Sahib and Silar sahib - were called geniuses for the raghas Kalyani, Bilahari & Kedharagowla.
Chinna Peeru Sahib and Peddha Peeru Sahib Brothers - were famous for their proficiency in the Raghas Saveri and Abheri.
Chinna Peeru was honored with the title ` Nadha Brahma.
Sheik Adam sahib of Chilakaluripeta - Guru of Dr.Sheik Chinna Moulana - acclaimed fame for Sheik Adam Ragha Alapana.
Sheik Madar Sahib - Sheik Kasim Sahib Pair - were also geniuses.
Madar Sahib was Chinn Moulan 's Uncle and Kasim sahib was Chinna Moulana 's father.
Sheik Chinna Moulana was born in Karavadi Village, Prakasam District, Andhra Pradesh.
Recognizing the importance and the role of  Thanjavur Bhaani  Thanjavur Bhaani very much wanted to get trained in this.
With this in view, Thanjavur Bhaani was under the tutelage of M/s.
Rajam and Duraikannu brothers of Nachiarkovil for some years.
Chinna Moulana was a childhood admirer of T.N. Rajarathnam Pillai, and observed Rajarathinam Pillai as Dr. Sheik Chinna Moulana Maanasika Guru.
Sheik Chinna Moulana gave Dr. Sheik Chinna Moulana first performance in 60s in Tamil Nadu, India 's and quickly gained renown.
Dr. Sheik Chinna Moulana performed at the Third International Asian Trade Fair, New Delhi in the year 1972.
Dr. Sheik Chinna Moulana has give performances widely both in India 's and abroad.
Dr. Sheik Chinna Moulana had visited Sri Lanka many times.
Dr. Sheik Chinna Moulana went to the United States and Canada in 1973 under the East-West exchange program.
There Dr. Sheik Chinna Moulana was awarded the title of  Nadhaswara Acharya  by Vassar College, New York.
Dr. Sheik Chinna Moulana visited Hong Kong in 1982 as an Indian Cultural delegate to the 7th Asian Arts Festival.
Dr. Sheik Chinna Moulana traveled all over Germany in 1991 and gave concerts.
Dr. Sheik Chinna Moulana visited France too in 1991.
Dr. Sheik Chinna Moulana visited Finland in 1996 and performed in the International Music Festival there.
Dr. Sheik Chinna Moulana has give performances at many important centers.
A few are Tansen Festival - Gwalior.
SAARC Festival Teenmurthy Bhavan, New Delhi and so on.
He gave a number of lecture demonstrations on Nadhaswaram music, both in home and abroad.
He was appointed as the  State Artist  of Tamil Nadu by the Govt.
of Tamil Nadu.
He was a Hon. Professor in the Raja 's Government Music College of Thiruvaiyaru, Thanjavur District, Tamil Nadu.
Films Division made a film on Dr. Sheik Chinna Moulana.
This film has been selected for the 31st National.
Film Festival of India 's and also for the International film Festival of India 's.
Dr.Sheik Chinna Moulana died on April 13, 1999 in Srirangam, aged 75 at the abode Lord Ranganatha after brief illness.
Foundation of Dr. Sheik Chinna Moulana.
The prime objective of the Trust is to globalize the importance of Nadhaswaram Music.
Bibijan is the only daughter of Sheik Chinna Moulana.
Chinna Moulana taught vocal music to Dr. Sheik Chinna Moulana daughter.
Sheik Subhan Sahib is the son in law and also disciple of Sheik Chinna Moulana.
Subhan Sahib accompanied sheik in concerts for few years.
Chinna Moulana has five grand sons and one granddaughter.
Today, Kasim are the front ranking Nadhaswaram artistes and are the torch bearers of Chinnamoulana 's tradition.
Dikshitar appreciated Vadivelu Pillai as an ekasandhagrahi, one who had the ability to repeat a song heard only once.
The quartet wrote a set of nine songs called navaratna mala in tribute of their teacher.
After a stint at the courts of Serfoji, the brothers moved to Travancore and were patronised by Swati Tirunal.
The king appointed Vadivelu Pillai as the court musician.
Vadivelu Pillai also introduced the concept of Mohiniaattam.
Until then Kathakali was the prevalent dance form in Kerala and was confined to male dancers.
Vadivelu Pillai elaborated and refined Mohiniattam along with Maharaja Swathi Tirunal, and this paved the way for women dancers in Kerala.
The four brothers composed numerous varnams and kritis.
Some of these are Amba Souramba and Amba Neelamba, Ambaneelambari, Satileni, apart from the navaratna mala.
Abheri is a raga in Carnatic music.
It is a Janya raga, whose Melakarta raga is Kharaharapriya, 22nd in the 72 Melakarta raga system.
Bhimplasi of Hindustani music sounds pretty close to Abheri.
Structure and Lakshana.
Abheri is an audava-sampoorna raga.
Abheri structure is as follows :.
The swaras in this scale are Chathusruthi Rishabham, Sadharana Gandharam, Suddha Madhyamam, Chathusruthi Dhaivatham and Kaisiki Nishadham.
In addition to these swaras, there are gamakas which also form part of Abheri.
The ascending scale is same as that of Udayaravichandrika raga, while the descending scale is that of Kharaharapriya raga.
There are some differing views on swaras in the scale of Abheri.
the scale of Abheri is considered a Bhashanga raga, with introduction of Suddha Dhiavatham in some phrases of the raga.
A different view is that this raga is a janya of Natabhairavi, with D2 being the anya swara.
This raga is closer to Bhagyasree Gandharam as for Bhagyasree Gandharam is sung softly.
Thus a subtle difference of Gandhara makes a listener to feel this raga as Bhagyasree Gandharam.
Another well known composition is Bhajare Re Manasa, a kriti written by Mysore Vasudevachar.
Muthuswami Dikshitar has composed Veenabheri in this raga.
However, the Abheri of Muthuswami Dikshitar might be quite different from what is considered Abheri today.
There are many thukadas composed in this raga of which Vellai Thamarai penned by Subramanya Bharathi is noteworthy.
This raga has been extensively used in movie songs / movie music.
Popular Classical Albums on this Raagam.
An excellent rendition of this Raaga can be found in one of L. Shankar Albums Raga Aberi.
this Raaga received a Grammy Nomination for this composition.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Abheris notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields 3 other janya ragams, namely, Mohanakalyani, Kedaragaula and Arabhi.
In case of Janya ragams, only notes that occur in both ascending and descending scale are taken for this change.
For further details and an illustration of Graha bhedam refer Graha bhedam on Sankarabharanam.
List of Film Songs based on Ragas.
Gambhiranata is a raga in Carnatic music.
Carnatic is an audava ragam.
Carnatic is a janya raga, as Carnatic does not have all the seven swaras.
Gambhiranata is also known as Shuddha Nata.
Structure and Lakshana.
Gambhiranata is a symmetric raga that does not contain rishabham or dhaivatam.
It is a pentatonic scale.
Its ascending and descending scale structure is as follows :.
The notes used in this scale are shadjam, antara gandharam, shuddha madhyamam, panchamam and kakali nishadam.
Gambhiranata ragam lends Gambhiranata ragam for elaboration due to the pentatonic nature and symmetricity of the scale.
The mallari tune played in Nadhaswaram at temple processions are set to this musical scale.
Here are some compositions set to this scale.
Famous film song Narumugaiye from Iruvar is composed in this ragam by A R Rahman.
Gambhiranatas notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields another pentatonic ragam, Bhupalam.
For more details and illustration of this concept refer Graha bhedam on Gambhiranata.
Salagam is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Salagam is the 37th melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
Salagam is called Sowgandini in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 1st ragam in the 7th chakra Rishi.
The mnemonic name is Rishi-Pa.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ra ga mi pa dha na.
The mnemonic phrase structure is as follows :.
In this scale, the notes shuddha rishabham, shuddha gandharam, prati madhyamam, shuddha dhaivatham and shuddha nishadham are used.
As Salagam is a melakarta ragam, by definition it is a sampoorna ragam.
It is the prati madhyamam equivalent of Kanakangi, which is the first melakarta.
Salagam has a minor janya ragam associated with Salagam.
See List of janya ragams for full list of ragams associated with Salagam and other melakartas.
A few compositions set to Salagam scale are :.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Only these ragams have a gap of 3 notes anywhere in Only these ragams scale, between G1 to M2.
Such a gap does not occur in any other melakarta by definition.
Kalyanavasantam is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Kalyanavasantam is a janya ragam from the 21st melakarta scale Keeravani.
Kalyanavasantam is a janya scale, as Kalyanavasantam does not have all the seven swaras in the ascending scale.
Kalyanavasantam is a combination of the pentatonic scale Chandrakauns of Hindusthani music and the sampurna raga scale Keeravani.
Structure and Lakshana.
Kalyanavasantam is an asymmetric ragam that does not contain rishabham or panchamam in the ascending scale.
Kalyanavasantam is an audava-sampurna ragam.
Kalyanavasantam structure is as follows :.
For the details of the notations and terms, see swaras in Carnatic music.
There are a few compositions set to Kalyanavasantam ragam.
Here are some popular kritis composed in Kalyanavasantam.
Saagarasuthaam Aaradhyaye composed by Mrs. Kalyani Varadarajan.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Graha literally means position and Bhedam means change.
Modal shift of the Tonic note to higher notes of a ragam, while retaining the notes positions, results in different ragams.
This is called Graha Bhedam.
Notes on above table.
Graha Bhedam can be applied on most Melakarta ragams to yield other Melakarta ragams.
When applying such modal shift of tonic note, some results are not valid Melakarta ragams.
Example scenarios are missing Panchamam or two of particular note, Gandharam, Madhyamam, Dhaivatam or Nishadam.
See Example Illustration in previous section.
The Graha Bhedam derivative of Kanakangi is Kamavardhini and vice-versa.
The Graha Bhedam derivatives of Mayamalavagowla are Rasikapriya and Simhendramadhyamam.
The Graha Bhedam derivative of Ragavardhini is Varunapriya and vice-versa.
The Graha Bhedam derivatives of Vachaspati are Charukesi, Gourimanohari and Natakapriya.
The Graha Bhedam derivatives of Shanmukhapriya are Shoolini, Dhenuka and Chitrambari.
The Graha Bhedam derivatives of Keeravani are Hemavati, Vakulabharanam and Kosalam.
The Graha Bhedam derivatives of Ratnangi are Gamanashrama and Jhankaradhwani.
The Graha Bhedam derivatives of Ganamurti are Vishwambari and Shamalangi.
The Graha Bhedam derivative of Vanaspati is Mararanjani and vice-versa.
The Graha Bhedam derivative of Manavati is Kantamani and vice-versa.
The Graha Bhedam derivatives of Sooryakantam are Senavati and Latangi.
The Graha Bhedam derivative of Kokilapriya is Rishabhapriya and vice-versa.
The Graha Bhedam derivative of Gayakapriya is Dhatuvardani and vice-versa.
The Graha Bhedam derivatives of Dharmavati are Chakravakam and Sarasangi.
The Graha Bhedam derivative of Hatakambari is Gavambhodi and vice-versa.
The graha bhedam derivatives of Naganandini are Bhavapriya and Vagadheeshwari.
The graha bhedam derivative of Gangeyabhooshani is Neetimati and vice-versa.
The graha bhedam derivative of Chalanata is Shubhapantuvarali and vice-versa.
The graha bhedam derivative of Shadvidamargini is Nasikabhooshani and vice-versa.
Graha bhedam can be applied to some of the janya ragams to yield other janya ragams.
Hence they lead to theoretical ragams, which have not yet been discovered.
The other four derivatives are Hindolam, Shuddha Saveri, Udayaravichandrika and Madhyamavathi.
Notes on above table.
Shivaranjani ragam and its Graha Bhedam derivatives are Revati and Sunadavinodini.
Notes on above table.
Hamsadhwani ragam and its graha bhedam derivative is Nagasvaravali.
Abhogi ragam and its graha bhedam derivative is Valaji.
Amritavarshini ragam and Amritavarshini graha bhedam derivative is Karnataka Shuddha Saveri.
Gambhiranata ragam and Bhupalam graha bhedam derivative is Bhupalam.
Dr. Pantula Rama is a Carnatic Music vocalist.
Early life and background.
Pantula Rama was born into a family with a lineage of music.
Her parents are Pantula Gopala Rao and Pantula Padmavathi a veena artiste.
Pantula Gopala Rao holds a Ph.D.
a Top grade Vocalist is a Reiki Master in the Natural Usui system of healing.
Pantula Rama has been performing since a Top grade Vocalist was eight.
a Top grade Vocalist technical perfection conforms to the best classical standards.
a Top grade Vocalist has performed across the country and abroad.
Conducted ` Nowkacharitam ' - Musical Opera of Thyagaraja.
A multitalented personality, Dr. Pantula Rama accompanies many artists of repute on violin.
Alapana is a form of melodic improvisation that introduces and develops a raga in Indian classical music.
As a term that is Sanskrit in language, alapana means to speak, address, discourse, communicate.
Alapana typically precedes a song that is going to be sung in the same raga.
Alapana is rendered in different speeds, with a gradual increase in tempo.
Likewise, the complexity of the patterns increases steadily as the alapana progresses.
Alapana is divided into three parts :.
In Carnatic music.
Performers and instrumental accompanists often render the alapana together and individually.
In Hindustani music.
Hindustani music features percussion accompaniment to raga alapanas once the phrasing has picked up sufficient complexity and tempo.
In a concert, alapana typically takes center stage.
Guruvayur Dorai is an Indian percussionist.
Guruvayur Dorai is one of the most senior-most exponents of the South Indian classical percussion instrument, the mridangam.
Guruvayur Dorai wide range of efforts in the field of mridangam and music have helped propagate the art around the globe.
An exponent of the Pudukottai style of mridangam, Guruvayur Dorai was born in Guruvayur, Kerala, to G.S. Krishna Iyer and Meenakshi.
mridangam, Guruvayur Dorai father was a priest and mother, a housewife.
His father has two brothers and three sisters.
His father sister Guruvayur Ponnammal was a highly reputed singer at the time.
There was already a vocalist and a violinist in the family, a mridangist was all that was lacking.
So his father decided to sculpt His father into one.
Moreover, Ponnammal, Rajamani and Dorai could make a living out of care of Dorai.
Guruvayur Dorai began to learn mridangam under the Late Palghat Subba Iyer when the Late Palghat Subba Iyer was six.
E.P. Narayana Pisharody of Eranallur also taught him at this time.
Pisharodys book Mridanga Nada Manjari was published by Guruvayur Dorai on September 23, 2001.
The legendary vocalist Chembai Vaidhyanatha Bhagavathar was teaching Ponnammal at that time.
Whenever he came to Guruvayur, Chembai used to stay at their house.
He took active interest in Dorais mridangam practice.
Guruvayur Dorai had Guruvayur Dorai debut performance at the age of eight, performing with none other than Guruvayur, Chembai Guruvayur, Chembai.
Meanwhile, His sister Guruvayur Ponnammal got a chance to sing in a Malayalam film.
As the opportunities were more copious in Chennai, their father decided to settle there.
In the same year, Guruvayur Dorai also happened to meet the legendary mridangam artist Palani Subramaniam Pillai in Thirupoontharai.
After Palani Subramaniam Pillai moved to Madras in 1953, Guruvayur Dorai commenced classes with the maestro.
This helped Palani Subramaniam Pillai understand and absorb the complexities of the Pudukottai style of mridangam.
Guruvayur Dorai stayed with Palani Subramaniam Pillai in Guruvayur Dorai residence for nearly nine years in the gurukulavasam fashion.
Guruvayur Dorai also accompanied Sr.
Vinjamuri Varadaraja Iyengar on multiple occasion to concerts across Andhrapadesh.
An excerpt from his interview - He encouraged me very much, kept me with him and let me play for him.
Apart from An excerpt from his interview, I gave a lot of kutcheries in Andhra Pradesh.
Because of his taking me with him, those Sabhas / people got acquainted with me and got to know me.
Read More About the Interview.
Namagiripettai K Krishnan is a Carnatic musician who plays the Nadaswaram.
He was born in Sendhamangalam village in Namakkal district, Tamil Nadu, India.
He gave many performances across the country.
In 1981, Krishnan was awarded the Padmashri by the Indian government for his contributions to Carnatic music.
He was also the Asthana Sangeetha Vidwan for the Tirumala Venkateswara Temple.
Krishna Ni Begane Baaro.
Krishna Ni Begane Baro is a famous classical song in Kannada Language.
It is composed in Raagam : Yamunaa KalyaaNi by Vyasatirtha.
The Taalam is Misra Chapu.
Vyasaraya Tirtha or Vyasatirtha, a Haridasa, was born at Bannur in the Mysore District of Karnataka state.
Vyasaraya Tirtha is regarded as one of the foremost dialecticians in the history of Indian philosophy.
Vyasaraya Tirtha belonged to the Dvaita school of Madhvacharya.
Vyasaraya Tirtha along with Jayatirtha, helped in systematizing Dvaita into an established school of Vedic thought.
He was a master at debate and dialogue in logic and philosophy.
The text of the lyric of the song has several versions with minor changes in the words.
This happened because many of the Carnatic musicians who propagated the song did not have knowledge of Kannada.
A popular version of this famous Kriti of Vyasaraya is given here.
krishNA nI bEgane bArO.
bEganE bArO mukhavannE tOrO.
kAlalandigE gejjE, neelada bAvuli ; neelavarNane nATyavanADuta bArO.
kaTiyalli uDugejje, beraLalli ungura ; koraLallu dharisida vaijayanti mAle.
kASi pItAmbara, kaiyalli koLalu ; pUSida SrIgandha maiyoLaganda.
tAyigE bAyalli jagavanne thorida ; jagadOddhAraka namma uDupi SrI krishNa.
Pallavi : Krishna !.
Come Quickly !.
Anupallavi : Come quickly and show face.
1 : on the feet, Blue-hued One, come to dance.
3 : Dressed in yellow Kashi flute in hand, and -LSB- with the anointed sandal scent from the body.
4 : The One who showed the world in the mouth to the mother, the upholder of the world !.
our Udupi Shri Krishna !.
Sheik Mahaboob Subhani.
Sheik Mahaboob Subhani is an Indian classical music nagaswaram artist.
Sheik Mahaboob Subhani . performs with Sheik Mahaboob Subhani . wife Kaleeshabi Mahaboob, also a nagaswaram artist.
Sheik Mahaboob Subhani was born in Prakasam district in Andhra Pradesh.
He received training at Sarada Sangeetha Kalasala, Kurnool and later under legendary instrumentalist, Sheikh Chinna Moulana Sahib.
Sheik Mahaboob Subhani . renders popular carnatic ragas and kritis on nagaswaram.
T. V. Sankaranarayanan.
He was born in Mayiladuturai of Thanjavur district in the state of Tamil Nadu in south India.
At the age of nine, he started learning music from his uncle, Madurai Mani Iyer.
He made his debut on the concert platform in 1968 and then gradually established himself as a Carnatic vocalist.
His emotion-laden style of singing has won him a large following among music lovers.
He has performed widely at home and abroad and has several albums to his credit.
Erode Nagaraj is a professional player of the Mrudangam instrument.
Nagaraj learned initially from Palladam V. Ramachandran and has been the disciple of Umayalpuram K. Sivaraman for over 14 years.
Nagaraj has been a lecturer in the Thanjavur Vaidyanatha Iyer School for Percussion in Chennai.
Nagaraj also conducts online classes for performers and students in the United States, United Kingdom, France and other countries.
Nagaraj has accompanied artists in various venues.
the name Kharaharapriya is a ragam in Carnatic music.
the name Kharaharapriya is the 22nd melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system.
the name Kharaharapriya has a distinct melody and brings out the Karuna rasam, invoking pathos in the listeners.
The Kafi thaat of Hindustani music is the equivalent of the name Kharaharapriya.
There are many theories behind the etymology of the name Kharaharapriya.
The most popular interpretation of the name is Loved by the slayer of demon Khara.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is 4th ragam in the 4th chakra Veda.
The mnemonic name is Veda-Bhu.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ri gi ma pa dhi ni.
The mnemonic phrase structure is as follows :.
The notes are chatushruti rishabham, sadharana gandharam, shuddha madhyamam, chatushruti dhaivatam and kaisiki Nishadam.
It is a sampoorna ragam - scale having all 7 swarams.
It is the shuddha madhyamam equivalent of Hemavati, which is the 58th melakarta scale.
Songs sung in the name Kharaharapriya ragas typically have long, elaborate alapanas, which exhibit the fluidity of the ragam.
Due to the even spacing of the swaras of Kharaharapriya, many janya ragams are associated with Kharaharapriya.
It is one of the melakarta scales that has a large number of janya ragams.
See List of janya ragams for full list of scales associated with Kharaharapriya.
the name Kharaharapriya has been decorated with compositions by many composers.
All except the Dikshitars, including Muthuswami Dikshitar, have composed songs in this ragam.
Thyagaraja has composed many in this ragam.
A few of the popular compositions are listed here.
The basic scale of the name Kharaharapriya has been used in several film songs in Indian film music.
Although rarely authentic, there are several film songs that are set in this scale, or scales derived from this ragam.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Kharaharapriyas notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields 5 other major melakarta ragams, namely, Kalyani, Hanumatodi, Natabhairavi, Shankarabharanam and Harikambhoji.
For further details and an illustration of Graha bhedam of this ragam refer Graha bhedam on Shankarabharanam.
Mavelikkara Velukkutty Nair.
Mavelikkara Velukutty Nair was an Indian mridangam player.
Early life and background.
Mavelikkara Velukkutty Nair was born on 2 October 1926 in Chettikulangara, Alleppey district, Kerala.
Mavelikkara Velukkutty Nair . had undergone preliminary lessons in Mridangam from father Mridanga Vidwan Muthukulam S. Kumara Pillai.
Later undergone advanced training from Maestro Sangeetha Kalanidhi Padmabhooshan Palghat Mani Iyer under Gurukula system for a period of 8 years.
Late Palghat R. Raghu and Umayalpuram K. Sivaraman were also disciples of Palghat Mani Iyer along with R. Raghu.
R. Raghu joined the Kerala State Government Service as Teacher in Mridangam at the Sri.
Swathi Thirunal College of Music in 1959.
R. Raghu has the distinction of being the first teaching faculty at the mridangam department of the Sri.
Swathi Thirunal College of Music, Trivandrum.
R. Raghu retired as Professor and Head, Department of Mridangam from the same college in 1982.
Had been Visiting Professor during 1984-85.
Had been imparting advanced training to students from across the country with Government of India cultural scholarship.
The curriculum on mridangam developed by Professor is still being followed in all the three music colleges in the State.
He was an avowed vocalist too.
He died on 24 July 2012.
He is survived by wife Rajamma, three sons and five daughters.
His son N V Babunarayanan is a noted violinist.
He had accompanied concerts of 4 generations of musicians, starting from the leading exponents of Karnatic Music.
Jayashri Ramnath is an Indian Carnatic music vocalist and Academy Award nominated music composer.
Jayashri Ramnath is a disciple of violin maestro Lalgudi Jayaraman.
Early life and training.
Jayashri was born in Kolkata, into a family of music connoisseurs and musicians.
She attended St. Anthonys High School in Chembur.
Soon, she went on to learn with T. R. Balamani, and trained under her for a period of 10 years.
Jayashri was also initiated into Hindustani music and trained under Mahavir Jaipurvale and Ajay Pohankar for about six years.
When she moved to Chennai, she came under the guidance and mentorship of her guru Lalgudi Jayaraman.
She also learnt the veena from G. N. Dhandapani Iyer.
Jayashri has a Bachelor of Commerce degree from R.A. Podar College, Mumbai.
She also has a Diploma in Music from Gandharva Mahavidyalaya, New Delhi.
Jayashri performed her first concert in 1982.
She has performed at various festivals and venues all across India and in over twenty different countries.
In India, she has performed in all the major cities.
In New Delhi : The Rashtrapati Bhavan, Vishnu Digambar festival, Gandharva Mahavidyalaya, Sri Shanmukhananda Sabha, India International Centre and Bhakti Utsav.
Musical exchanges and dialogues.
Bombay Jayashris jugalbandis with Ronu Majumdar and Shubha Mudgal have been very well received.
Shubha Mudgal has dialogued with artistes in dance like Leela Samson and Priyadarsini Govind.
She performed in Bhaire Baanvari, the story of Meera, conceptualized and directed by Gowri Ramnarayan.
She also was a part of Mathemagician with actor V Balakrishnan and written by Gowri Ramnarayan.
Jayashri also performed at the MTV Coke Studio Season 1 with Ustad Rashid Khan and Richa Sharma.
Jayashri also conceptualized Listening to Life - A concert that features the journey of a musician as a lover of music.
Cross cultural collaboration.
She has sung with Egyptian singer Hisham Abbas and Senegalese singer Thione Seck.
In 2012, she sang the poetry of Mirza Ghalib composed by Eero Hameenniemi at the Vantaa Festival festival, Helsinki, Finland.
She sang in Mahesh Dattanis Morning Raga for the music of Amit Heri.
She has also sung in various films in Hindi, Kannada, Telugu and Malayalam languages.
She has also composed music for actor Revathi s films Verukku Neer and Kerala Cafe.
In 2004, Jayashri composed music for Silappadhikaaram, a dance drama commissioned by the Cleveland Cultural Alliance.
Passing on an inheritance.
The book was published to commemorate Sanjay Subrahmanyan birth centenary.
Jayashri featured in the first full length Carnatic music film ` Margazhi Ragam ', conceptualized by Director P Jayendra.
This was a ground breaking venture that showed Carnatic music in a whole different light.
The movie, released in 2008, used the very best and latest technologies for video and sound recording.
Another dimension of music which Jayashri is focused on is in exploring the therapeutic and healing value that music can generate.
She has been working closely with institution like Kilikili in Karnataka and Sankalp in Tamil Nadu which care for autistic children.
This domain is a matter of serious engagement for Jayashri and her students.
However Jayashri has denied the allegation.
Jayashri was one among the singers who sang the Semmozhiyaana Thamizh Mozhiyaam song for the World Classical Tamil Conference 2010.
She also appeared on the screen after T. L. Maharajan and was followed by Aruna Sayeeram.
The song features the fusion of various musical cultures including Indian Carnatic, Folk, Acoustic, Sufi, Rock and Rap.
The Lyrics of the song was written by the popular politician M. Karunanidhi and composed by A. R. Rahman.
Film playback singing.
Her first song was for Ilayaraja.
Her other playback career highlighting song was Vaseegara for the film Minnale in 2001, composed by Harris Jayaraj.
This song was sung again by herself in the Telugu version of the film also.
She had given many hit songs with Harris Jayaraj in various languages.
She has a mesmerizing voice which makes all class of listeners to pay attention on her songs.
She has worked with the music Maestro M.S. Viswanathan in a devotional album called Arul tharum Abirami.
Ratnangi is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Ratnangi is the 2nd melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
Ratnangi is called Phenadhyuti in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 2nd ragam in the 1st chakra Indu.
The mnemonic name is Indu-Sri.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ra ga ma pa dha ni.
The mnemonic phrase structure is as follows :.
The scale uses the notes shuddha rishabham, shuddha gandharam, shuddha madhyamam, shuddha dhaivatham and kaisiki nishadham.
As Ratnangi is a melakarta ragam, by definition Ratnangi is a sampoorna ragam.
Ratnangi is the shuddha madhyamam equivalent of Jalarnavam, which is the 38th melakarta scale.
Phenadhyuti is the 2nd Melakarta in the original list compiled by Venkatamakhin.
The notes used in the scale are the same, but the ascending scale is different.
Ratnangi has a few minor janya ragams associated with Ratnangi, of which Revati is very popular.
See List of janya ragams for full list of scales associated with Ratnangi.
Here are a few common compositions sung in concerts, set to Ratnangi.
The following compositionis set to Phenadhyuti.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Ratnangis notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields 2 other melakarta ragams, namely, Gamanashrama and Jhankaradhwani.
For further details and an illustration refer Graha bhedam on Ratnangi.
Nattakurinji is the janya raga of 26th melakarta raja harikambhoji in Carnatic music.
It is an audava janya raga, and has two types of sancharam.
This raga is mostly sung in evenings.
It is used both in Hindustani and Carnatic music.
Purandara Dasas Carnatic music compositions are mostly in simple Kannada ; some are in Sanskrit.
Purandara Dasas Carnatic signed Purandara Dasas Carnatic compositions with the mudra, Purandara Vittala.
Inscriptional evidence suggests Purandara Dasa was born in 1484 CE in Kshemapura, near Tirthahalli, Shivamogga district, Karnataka state.
He received a good education in accordance with family traditions and acquired proficiency in simple Kannada, Sanskrit, and sacred music.
At age 16 he married Saraswatibai, said by tradition to have been a pious young girl.
He lost his parents at age 20, thereby inheriting his fathers business of gemstones and pawning.
He prospered and became known as navakoti narayana.
The miserly Srinavasa lent the man The miserly Srinavasa money.
Srinivasas wife confessed what had happened, and Srinivasa Nayaka was converted to belief in the virtue of a charitable life.
In Srinivasa Nayaka very first song composition, Srinivasa Nayaka laments Srinivasa Nayaka wasted life of indulgence.
It begins with the words Ana lae kara in the Shuddha Saveri raga, set to Triputa tala.
Purandara Dasa spent Purandara Dasa last years in Hampi and also sang in Krishnadevaraya durbar.
The mantapa in which Purandara Dasa stayed is known as Purandara Dasa Mantapa in Hampi.
The mantapa in which he stayed died in 1564 at the age of 80.
There are around 4.75 lakh kirtanas attributed to The mantapa in which he stayed.
According to legend, The mantapa in which he stayed desired to make 5 lakh keerthanas.
Most His son Madhwapathi songs are in praise of Lord Narayana and other Devatas.
Due to this, His son Madhwapathi is believed to be an avatar of Narada.
Purandara Dasa and Purandara Dasas Carnatic music.
Purandara Dasa systematized the method of teaching Purandara Dasas Carnatic music which is followed to the present day.
Another of Purandara Dasa important contributions was the fusion of bhava, raga, and laya in Purandara Dasa compositions.
Purandara Dasa was the first composer to include comments on ordinary daily life in song compositions.
Purandara Dasa used elements of colloquial language for Purandara Dasa lyrics.
Purandara Dasa also composed a large number of lakshya and lakshana geetas, many of which are sung to this day.
Purandara Dasa sooladis are musical masterpieces and are the standard for raga lakshana.
Scholars attribute the standardization of varna mettus entirely to Purandara Dasa.
But not more than 700 compositions are accessible now.
Purandara Dasa was a vaggeyakara, a lakshanakara, and the founder of musical pedagogy.
Purandara Dasa had great influence on Hindustani music.
The foremost Hindustani musician Tansen s teacher, Swami Haridas also a Saraswat Brahmin was Purandara Dasas disciple.
Purandara Dasas compositions are equally popular in Hindustani music.
Hindustani music legends such as Bhimsen Joshi, Madhav Gudi and Basavaraj Rajguru have made them more popular in recent years.
M.L.Vasantha Kumari was awarded an honorary doctorate by Mysore University for M.L.Vasantha Kumari contributions to Purandara Dasas music.
Of latest, Mysore Ramachandracharya is highly propagating dasa sahitya through his programs.
Tirumala Tirupathi Devasthanams is also propagating the dasa krithis through the Dasa Sahitya Project.
Film director and playwright Girish Karnad made a documentary film titled, Kanaka-Purandara on the two medieval Bhakti poets of Karnataka.
Purandara Dasa has explained the essence of the Upanishads, Vedas, in simple Kannada.
Purandara Dasa Keerthanas have simple lessons on leading a noble life.
Purandara Dasa is an exemplary person among the devotees of Sri Hari : Dasarendare Purandara Dasarayya.
The same guru acclaimed the literature produced by Purandara Dasa in simple Kannada as Purandaropanishat.
They are given the status of the Upanishads by The same guru guru.
Purandara Dasa fought the evils of casteism through Purandara Dasa songs.
Purandara Dasa has made some forceful expressions on untouchability which was dogging the society.
Dasa 's message is loud and clear rejecting untouchability in our society.
Purandara Dasa uses the name of Purandara Vittala to imply any God.
This is evident from Purandara Dasa other songs on various Gods and Goddesses.
Similar ideas were expressed by many other poets also.
Purandara Dasa and Thyagaraja.
Thyagaraja . is said that saint Thyagaraja was greatly inspired by Purandara Dasa.
There are several parallels in their lives.
Both Purandara Dasa and saint Thyagaraja were pious, saintly and great devotees of Krishna and Rama respectively.
The lyrics of their krithis were simple, but with high philosophical and spiritual contents.
Both were musical prodigies who disliked royal patronages and gifts.
They abhorred narastuthi or praising of mortals.
Purandara Dasa was not enamoured of the royal bounty and wealth of King of Vijayanagara nagar.
Similarly, saint Thyagaraja too refused invitations from the Tanjavur Maharaja and other Kings of Travancore and Mysore.
Both have commented on Both feelings in musical forms and idioms.
Purandara Purandara Dasa and saint Thyagaraja have expressed their thoughts and feelings on other aspects of life as well.
A general concept of the meaning of their songs is given within brackets.
Purandara Dasa says Manava nilisuvudu balu kashta and Thyagarajas The lyrics of their krithis are Manasu nilpa shakti leka pothe.
Purandara Dasas Sakala graha bala neene and Tyagarjas Graha bala memi are close in their contents.
Similarly, Dasas Dwaitavu sukhava and Thyagarajas Dwaitamu sukhama are alike in their philosophical content.
There are several examples where the thoughts of these two men run very similar.
A few relevant lines are mentioned :.
Tirupati Tirumala Devasthanam is propagating and popularising the literature of Purandara Dasa under the Dasa Sahitya Project.
A statue of Purandaradasa was dedicated at the foot of Tirumala in Alipiri.
T. N. Krishnan.
Trippunithura Narayana Krishnan is a Carnatic music violinist.
Personal life and background.
Krishnan was born in Tripunithura, Kerala to A. Narayana Iyer and Ammini Ammal.
TN Krishnan is married to Kamala Krishnan and has two children, Viji Krishnan Natarajan, and Sriram Krishnan.
Both Viji Krishnan Natarajan and Sriram Krishnan are well-known violinists and follow the footsteps of their father.
T N Krishnans sister N Rajam is a famous violin player in Hindusthani tradition.
TN Krishnan, a child prodigy, made his debut concert at the age of eight.
Krishnan first arrived in Madras in 1942.
Mr. Sri R. Aiyadurai and Sri R. Aiyadurai wife Smt.
Thangam Aiyadurai welcomed the young Krishnan in to their home as their own.
The Krishnan family and the Sri R. Aiyadurai family share close ties till date.
Sri R. Aiyadurai performance gives the importance Sri R. Aiyadurai gave to expressional restraint.
Sri R. Aiyadurai scans the ragas with an eye on beauteous light and shade.
Sri R. Aiyadurai travels extensively on musical tours all over the world.
Awards and titles.
Krishnan was awarded the Sangeet Natak Akademi Award in 1974 and became a fellow of the academy in 2006.
He received the Sangeetha Kalanidhi in 1980.
Krishnan was awarded the Padma Shri in 1973 and the Padma Bhushan in 1992 by the Government of India.
He received the Sangeetha Kalasikhamani award for the year 1999 given by The Indian Fine arts Society, Chennai.
Natakapriya, is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Carnatic is the 10th melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system.
According to the Muthuswami Dikshitar school, the 10th melakarta ragam is called Natabharanam.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is a sampoorna ragam - ragam having all 7 swarams.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 4th ragam in the 2nd chakra Netra.
The mnemonic name is Netra-Bhu.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ra gi ma pa dhi ni.
The mnemonic phrase structure is as follows :.
The notes used in this scale are shuddha rishabham, sadharana gandharam, shuddha madhyamam, chathusruthi dhaivatham and kaisiki nishadham.
Natakapriya is the shuddha madhyamam equivalent of Shadvidamargini, which is the 46th melakarta ragam.
Natabharanam is the 10th Melakarta in the original list compiled by Venkatamakhin.
The notes used in the scale are the same, but the scales are vakra.
The notes used in this scale is an shadava-sampurna raga.
Sindhu Bhairavi is one of the few janya ragams associated with The notes used in this scale.
See List of Janya ragams for a full list of its janyas.
Here are some compositions set to this raga.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Natakapriyas notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields 3 other major melakarta ragams, namely, Vachaspati, Charukesi and Gourimanohari.
For an illustration, refer Graha bhedam on Vachaspati.
Maharajapuram Viswanatha Iyer.
Maharajapuram Viswanatha Iyer was one of the great Indian Carnatic vocalists.
He won several awards including Sangeetha Kalanidhi and Sangeetha Bhupathy.
Early life and background.
Viswanatha Iyer was born in Maharajapuram to Rama Iyer, a singer.
He was trained initially by Umayalpuram Swaminatha Iyer, a direct disciple of Maha Vaidyanatha Iyer.
A unique feature about Umayalpuram Swaminatha Iyer music was Umayalpuram Swaminatha Iyer great success in raga elaboration in great detail.
The raga alapana of Mohanam was one of his specialties.
As a Film Artiste.
a Film Artiste acted in a Tamil movie Bhaktha Nandhanar released on the 1st of January 1935 as the landlord Vedhiyar.
The famous K.B. Sundarambal acted as Nandhanar in this movie.
Indian Carnatic musician K S Narayana Iyengar was a master of the South Indian instrument, the chitravina.
He contributed heavily to the development of the instrument.
Narayana Iyengar was born on 25 January 1903, near Tirunelveli, Tamil Nadu, India.
Though Narayana Iyengar displayed an early fascination for music, he only commenced learning formally at the age of 14.
His guru was Kodaganallur Subbaiyya Bhagavatar, a fine vocalist who could also play the gottuvadyam.
He had his general education at the Pattamadai High School.
It was music that held his fascination and he decided to dedicate his life to it.
Narayana Iyengar requested him to draft him in as his pupil.
A few years later, he agreed to take on another talented lad, who also brought him glory, Semmangudi Srinivasa Iyer.
He came to be called Gotuvadyam Narayana Iyengar.
Even in his mid 20s, he was invited to be a Royal Artiste in Trivandrum and later in Mysore.
On October 2, 1939, the Malaya Tribune wrote :.
Musical style and impact.
He was at ease whether at improvising or interpreting the compositions of great masters.
His other admirers included the Nizam of Hyderabad, and the Maharajas of Jaipur, Cooch-Bihar, Gwalior etc.
Leaders like Mahatma Gandhi, Sarojini Naidu, Rabindranath Tagore, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru and Swami Shivananda also appreciated Narayana Iyengars music.
Sarojini Naidu declared, In Sarojini Naidu hands, the gotuvadyam ceases to be an instrument.
It becomes a subtle, living voice, capable of expressing every nuance of human passion.
Rabindranath Tagore said, Mr Narayana Iyengar impressed me immensely with Rabindranath Tagore expert expositions.
Veteran Mysore Doreswami Iyengar narrated once the extent of Narayana Iyengars impact in Mysore.
Once the challenge became insurmountable, Veena Seshanna and Subbanna reverted to Veena Seshanna and Subbanna chosen careers.
Mysore Vasudevachar was another great admirer of his music.
Narayan standardised the internal structure, string arrangements, tuning and playing methods of the gotuvadyam.
V V Shadagopan learnt vocal music from Narayana Iyengar.
The latters technique and style inspired many artistes like Mannargudi Savitri Ammal and M V Varahaswami to take to this instrument.
He had several best-selling gramophone albums to his credit like Mokshamu galada, Parama pavana and Vaishnava janato.
Narayana Iyengar believed that :.
He died on January 11, 1959, soon after playing a live concert for All India Radio.
His music lives on through his son, Chitravina Narasimhan, and his grandchildren N. Ravikiran, Shashikiran, Kiranavali, and Ganesh.
Sucharitra is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Carnatic is the 67th melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
Carnatic is called Santana manjari in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 1st ragam in the 12th chakra Aditya.
The mnemonic name is Aditya-Pa.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ru gu mi pa dha na.
The mnemonic phrase structure is as follows :.
The swaras used in this scale are shatsruthi rishabham, antara gandharam, prati madhyamam, shuddha dhaivatham and shuddha nishadham.
Sucharitra, being a melakarta ragam, by definition is a sampoorna ragam.
It is the prati madhyamam equivalent of Yagapriya, which is the 31st melakarta scale.
Sucharitra currently has no janya ragam associated with it.
See List of janya ragams for those janyas associated with other melakarta ragams.
Sucharitra scale has been used for the following compositions :.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Sucharitras notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, does not yield any other melakarta ragam.
Sri Kantha Krishnamacharyulu.
Sri Kantha Krishnamacharyulu . was contemporary to the Kakatiya king, Orugallu.
There is a mention about Krishnamaacharyulu, Krishnamaacharyulu composotions and Krishnamaacharyulu miraculous life in Prataaapa rudra charitraand siddheswara charitra.
Currently, Annamacharya of the 15th century is regarded as first vaggeyakara in Telugu.
But, that position belongs to Saint Krishnamayya, as Annamacharya lived 300 years prior to Annamacharya.
Musicologists and scholars believe that Krishnayya 's writings bore an indelible influence on later poet-composers.
For instance, the song, ` Ye Kulajudaina Nemi ' was inspired by Saint Krishnamayya.
Kulajudaina Nemi ' compositions were rendered in simple prose format but encased the highest Vaishanavism.
There is no linguistic ornamentation, so to say.
Kulajudaina Nemi ' is venerated as the father of sankeertana by the later saint-poets of Telugu language.
Of these, only 200 have been retrieved so far and are in existence as of now.
` Srikanta krishnamaachaaryulu an excerpt from the article  The unknown composers of South India.
contributed by S/O Jogarao Sri.
V. Murali Mohan, Cultural Correspondent, published in The Indian Express, Vizianagram edition dt 02.12.1986, Mss manu Scripts ` Prataapa Rudreeyam.
3Velugulo annamayya-cheekatlo Saint Krishnamayya news item raticle published in Vaartha, Telugu daily.
Library , Mss manu Scripts ` Prataapa Rudreeyam  and translated to Keerthans by Sri.
Vinukomnda Murali Mohan, a noted Musician of Vizag, so it would be easier for everyone to remember and render.
S/O Jogarao Sri.
SriKantha Krishnamacharyulu, also known as Saint Krishnamayya, was a renowned devotee and poet belonging to the 12th - 13th century.
It was believed that SriKantha Krishnamacharyulu composed over four hundred thousand vachanas in priase of Lord Sri.
Varaha Lakshmi Narasimha.
only 200 survived to this day.
Varaha Lakshmi Narasimha . Simhagiri Vachanas are still recited in Simhachala in Vizag.
His Simhagiri Vachanas works were perhaps available to Annamayya.
Saint Krishnamayya was also a converted Vaishnavite.
The Krishnamayya foundation of Visakhapatnam had launched a project, on 4th July 2009, in the name of Saint Krishnamayya viz.
Vinukonda Murali Mohan, S/O Jogarao Sri.
Murali Mohan is the creator and author of Krishnamayya Project.
It is set in the Sri Ragam and is in Aadi Talam.
The kriti is set to Sri Ragam, which is a janya of 22nd Melakarta Kharaharapriya.
endarO mahAnubhAvulu-andariki vandanamulu.
chanduru varuni antha.
chndamunu hrdayAra-vindamuna jUci.
brahmAnandamanu bhavimcu vAaru -.
sAma gAna lOla manasija lAvaNya dhanya mUrdhanyul.
mAnasa vana cara vara sancAramu nilipi mUrti bAguga poDaganE vAr -.
saraguna pAdamulaku svAntamanu sarOjamunu samarpaNamu sEyu vAr -.
patita pAvanuDanE parAtparuni gurinci paramArthamagu nija mArgamutOnu.
bADucunu sallApamutO svara layAdi rAgamula deliyu vAr -.
hari guNa maNimaya saramulu galamuna shObhillu bhakta kOTulilalO telivitO.
celimitO karuNa galgu jagamellanu sudhA drSTicE brOcu vAr -.
hoyalu mIra naDalu galgu sarasuni sadA kanula jucucunu pulaka.
sharIrula I Ananda payOdhi nimagnula I mudambunanu yashamu galavAr -.
parama bhAgavata mauni vara shashi vibhAkara sanaka sanandana.
digIsha sura kimpuruSa kanaka kashipu suta nArada tumburu.
pavanasUnu bAlacandra dhara shuka sarOjabhava bhUsuravarulu.
parama pAvanulu ghanulu shAshvatulu kamala bhava sukhamu sadAnubhavulu gAka.
nI mEnu nAma vaibhavambulanu nI parAkrama dhairyamula shAnta mAnasamu nIvulanu.
vacana satyamunu, raghuvara nIyeDa sadbhaktiyu janincakanu durmatamulanu kalla.
jEsinaTTi nImadi neringi santasambunanu guNa bhajanA-nanda kirtanamu jEyu vAr -.
bhAgavata rAmAyaNa gItAdi shruti shAstra purAnamu marmamulanu shivAdi sanmatamula.
gUDhamulan muppadi mukkOTi surAntarangamula bhAvamula nerigi bhava rAga layAdi.
saukhyamucE cirAyuvula galigi niravadhi sukhAtmulai tyAgarAptulaina vAr -.
prEma muppiri gonu vELa nAmamu dalacEvAru rAmabhaktuDaina tyAgarAjanutuni nija dAsulaina vAr -.
Salutations to all those great men in this world.
Those men will feel the moonlike beautiful form of the God in Those men hearts and will be happy about it.
Those who worship you who is fond of Samagana.
They control their mind and worship you who is as beautiful as Manmada.
They submit their hearts at your feet.
Apart from them there are others and salutations to them also.
They praise your form, name, valour, bravery, peaceful heart, true words.
You destroy all bad thoughts that prevent people from praying you, they know that and they praise your qualities.
This proposal used scales with notes that do not conform to the sampurna raga system.
Skipped notes or repeated notes, etc., were used in some of the ragas.
Some of the ragas of any Melakarta system will use Vivadi swaras.
The original system is supposed to avoid such ill-effects and was followed by the Muthuswami Dikshitar school.
The naming of the original system followed Katapayadi system.
These melakarta ragas were sampurna ragas.
Some of the names of the ragas had to be modified to fit into the Katapayadi system.
Rules for Melakarta.
Some ragas though are the same in both systems, and in some cases the scales are same, while names are different.
The mela system of ragas was first propounded by Raamamaatya in Melakarta work Svaramelakalanidhi c. 1550.
He is considered the father of mela system of ragas.
Later Venkatamakhin expounded in the 17th century in his work Caturdandi Prakaasikaa a new mela system known today as melakarta.
However, today the 72 melakarta ragas use a standardized pattern, unlike Venkatamakhins pattern, and have gained significant following.
The scales in this page are those proposed by Govindhacharya.
The 72 melakarta ragas are split into 12 groups called chakras, each containing 6 ragas.
The ragas within the chakra differ only in the dhaivatham and nishadham notes, as illustrated below.
The name of each of the 12 chakras suggest their ordinal number as well.
Table of Melakarta ragas.
The 72 melakarta ragas can be divided into two parts : suddha Madhyamam and prati Madhyamam ragas.
See Katapayadi sankhya for more information on how to derive the various swaras of a raga from its melakarta number.
See swaras in Carnatic music for explanation of the notations like R1, G2, N2, etc.
Popular Melakarta scheme.
Vidya Subramanian is a Carnatic style vocalist and teacher.
Vidya Subramanian is a disciple of Padmabhushan Lalgudi Sri Jayaraman.
Vidya Subramanian lives in Chennai, India with Vidya Subramanian husband, Dr. K. Subramanian, and their children, Skandan and Parvathi.
Awards won by Vidya Subramanian.
Vidya Subramanian co-hosts a podcast series on Carnatic music called Raaga Rasika.
List of Carnatic music treatises.
These are books on Carnatic music considered authoritative and necessary for a serious study of Carnatic music and Carnatic evolution.
Most of them are in Sanskrit, and some even date from before the Christian era.
A list of them are available below.
Charulatha Mani is a popular young Carnatic and Cine Playback singer.
Charulatha Mani has been performing Carnatic concerts since 1999.
She has also sung for movies.
Charulatha Mani has appeared in numerous TV shows and radio programmes, in India, and overseas.
She has recorded many, CD and DVD albums.
Charulatha Mani is a leading Carnatic music vocalist and has a huge fan following in India and abroad.
Isai Payanam holds a Masters degree in Music from the University of Madras.
Charulatha Mani is also a prominent Cine Playback singer with several super-hits in many south Indian languages to Isai Payanam credit.
Isai Payanam super-hits include :.
Isai Payanam also writes the column  A Ragas journey  for The Hindu newspaper which is widely read and appreciated.
Charulatha Mani has performed in all major sabhas in Chennai and all over India.
Isai Payanam has toured London, Canada, Australia, Singapore, the United States, Sri Lanka, and Europe.
Charulathas music is frequently featured in radio broadcasts and television appearances.
Charulatha Mani also pursues a career in Playback singing for films.
South Indian Cultural Association, Hyderabad.
South Indian Cultural Association or SICA is a non profit organization for carnatic music and dance.
It is located in Hyderabad, India.
The main function of the organisation is to organise cultural events mainly at Ravindra Bharathi.
Renowned Classical music and dance artists perform for SICA during their festival in February and March.
SICA was established in 1959.
List of Performers.
Admission free to members of SICA and invited guests ; for others by daily donor passes.
available at he venue an hour before the programmes.
New Members enrolled.
Ph 98491 24675/94408 84863.
SOUTH INDIAN CULTURAL ASSOCIATION presents a grand Festival.
of Music and Dance from FEBRUARY 11TH TO 17TH Feb 2013, daily at 6.30 pm.
13th : DR SOBHA NAIDU with Hyderabad., Artists disciples presents JAGADANANDAKAARAKA.
Kuchupudi dance ballet ,14 th SIKKIL GURUCHARAN, Vocal, 15th KADRI GOPALNATH.
and party, SAXOPHONE, 16th : Kum.A.KANYAKUMARI and party, VIOLIN PANCHAGAM.
17TH : PRIYA SISTERS, Chennai Devotional music.
Admission by SEASON DONOR PASSES, AT CONCESSIONAL RATES to ALL LIFE AND.
ANNUAL MEMBERS OF SICA at Rs .400 / - or Rs .200 per head.
These festival programmes are organised mainly for the benefit of SICA members.
For non members at extra rates.Reservation of seats can be done at the office.
of the Association daily between 5.00 & 6.30 pm.
In case your subscription is due in Jan please pay it off on the above date.
when you attend the programme.
We would thank you to help We in enrolling new.
LIFE and Annual members from amongst yourfriends and relatives.
For any further details, pl contact 98491 24675/94408 84863/8885151420.
Palladam Sanjiva Rao.
Palladam Sanjiva Rao was an Indian flautist and carnatic musician from the state of Tamil Nadu.
Sanjiva Rao was born in 1882 in the town of Palladam near Coimbatore in a Thanjavur Marathi family.
Sanjiva Rao learnt music under Shatkala Narasayya and Sirkazhi Narayanaswamy and learnt flute from Sarabha Sastri for seven years.
Palladam Sanjiva Rao . playing is noted for His playing unique style and the tonality.
Palladam Sanjiva Rao is the grandfather of singer Prasanna.
Avaneeswaram S R Vinu.
Avaneeswaram S R Vinu is an Indian Violin player.
Early life and background.
Avaneeswaram S R Vinu was born to Avaneeswaram.N Trichur Ramachandran and Sahithi Devi in Trivandrum, Kerala.
Avaneeswaram S R Vinu grand father late Avaneeswaram.K.Krishna Pillai was a renowned Nagaswaram player.
Later Avaneeswaram S R Vinu undergone higher studies in violin from Maestro Mysore M Nagaraj.
Avaneeswaram S R Vinu is one of the sought after accompanying violinists.
Awards and recognitions.
Avaneeswaram S R Vinu is an A TOP grade artiste of All India Radio and Doordarsan.
Lalgudy Gopalayyar award from Madras Music Academy 2004.
Lalgudy Jayaraman award from Madras Music Academy 2004.
Lalgudy Jayaraman award from Madras Music Academy 2005.
Has been conferred with the honour of Sri Kanchi Kama Koti Peetam Asthana Vidwan in 2010.
Has been conferred with the honour of Sangeetha Rathna from Sri Sathyasai seva Organisation, Palakkad 2010.
Palakkad 2010 has been conferred with the honour of Youth Excellence Award from Maharajapuram Viswanatha Iyyer Trust, Chennai in 2012.
Palakkad 2010 has received the Senior Scholarship from Department of Culture, Government of India in 1998.
Palakkad 2010 was the winner in Violin at Trivandrum, Kerala State school Youth Festival in 1988.
Palakkad 2010 has played on various cassettes and CDs including Charsur, Manorama audios, Intreco etc.
Avaneeswaram S R Vinu is married to Dr.S.Aswathy Vinu, who is an A grade vocalist in All India Radio.
The couple has one daughter, Gayathri Nandana.
In Carnatic music, the anupallavi comes after the pallavi and is usually the second section of any composition.
Carnatic is then followed by one or more charanams.
The anupallavi is optional.
In such compositions pallavi is followed by one or more charanams.
Papanasa Mudaliyar was an early Carnatic music composer who lived in Tamil Nadu, India.
Among Papanasa Mudaliyar compositions mukattai kAttiya in Bhairavi ragam and nadamAdittirintha in Kambhoji ragam are well known.
Later Tyagaraja followed this in songs like Adigi sukhamu in Madhyamavathi raga.
Kokilapriya is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Kokilapriya is the 11th Melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
The 11th ragam in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music is called Kokilaravam.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 5th ragam in the 2nd chakra Netra.
The mnemonic name is Netra-Ma.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ra gi ma pa dha na.
Its structure is as follows :.
As Kokilapriya is a melakarta ragam, by definition Kokilapriya is a sampoorna ragam.
Kokilapriya is the shuddha madhyamam equivalent of Suvarnangi, which is the 47th melakarta.
Kokilaravam is the 11th Melakarta in the original list compiled by Venkatamakhin.
The notes used in the scale are the same, but the scales are vakra.
It is an shadava-sampurna raga.
Kokilapriya has a few minor janya ragams associated with Kokilapriya.
See List of janya ragams for full list of ragams associated with this scale.
Here are a few common compositions sung in concerts, set to Kokilapriya.
Muthuswami Dikshitar s composition Kodandarama is set to Kokilaravam ragam.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Kokilapriyas notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields Rishabhapriya melakarta ragam.
For further details and an illustration refer Graha bhedam on Kokilapriya.
H.K. Narasimha Murthy.
H. K. Narasimhamurthy is a Carnatic music violinist.
Life and Career.
Sri H.K.Narasimha Murthy is a senior and leading violinist hailing from Mysore.
Sri Narasimha Murthy 's acumen was shaped by Sri Narasimha Murthy 's training in the revered Parur school of violin.
Sri Narasimha Murthy 's abilities were recognized early.
Sri Narasimha Murthy 's won the first prize at the prestigious All India Radio competition, nearly forty years ago.
Sri Murthy has, throughout Sri Narasimha Murthy 's career, enriched music concerts with Sri Narasimha Murthy 's violin accompaniment.
Balamuralikrishna, Sri K.J. Yesudas, Sri T.V.Shankaranarayan, Sri T.N.Seshagopalan, Sri K.S.Gopalakrishnan and the Bombay Sisters, Smt.Saroja and Smt.Lalitha.
Balamuralikrishna is one of those rare combinations of a very distinguished performer and an exceptional Guru.
Balamuralikrishna epitomises the traits of a true preceptor.
His exemplary sincerity is an acknowledged fact that mastering the art of playing the violin is a challenge in itself.
It is an even bigger challenge to impart that mastery to one 's students.
More than fifty of his disciples are professional musicians.
Awards and titles.
H.K.Narasimha Murthy has won several awards such as  VISHESHA ACHARYA  award and  The Pappa Venkataramiah Award.
Tyagaraja Aradhana is an annual Carnatic music festival held in January and February.
Many exponents of Carnatic music come to perform and are watched by thousands of ardent fans of Indian classical music.
The Aradhana in its present format is not even a hundred years old.
Thyagaraja died in 1847.
A few days before Thyagaraja death, Thyagaraja had renounced everything and had become a sanyasi.
Thyagaraja disciples returned to His disciples respective villages and observed Thyagaraja death anniversary at His disciples own homes.
From the next year, efforts were made by musical stalwarts to observe the anniversary at Tiruvayyaru the anniversary at Tiruvayyaru.
By next year, the Tillaisthanam brothers fell out of favour with each other and each began conducting a parallel Aradhana.
Musicians aligned Musicians with one or the other brother and soon two rival factions came into being.
The Chinna Katchis celebrations began five days before the a parallel Aradhana and concluded on the Aradhana day.
The Periya Katchis began on a parallel Aradhana day and continued for four days after that.
On one count, both groups were united.
They did not allow women to perform during the Aradhana.
They also did not permit nadaswaram performances.
Seeing the rampant factionalism and discrimination against women, she decided to take action.
She also had an idol of saint Tyagaraja sculpted and installed in front of the memorial.
The consecration of the temple took place in early 1926.
They cited several instances from Tyagarajas songs where her Harikatha had complained about women in general.
Undeterred, Bangalore Nagarathnamma began a third front which conducted its own music programs at the rear of the shrine.
This idea was adopted and the choral rendition of the five songs was made an integral feature of the Aradhana.
When she died in 1952, she was buried close to Tyagarajas memorial and a statue was erected on the spot.
The statue directly gazes on Tyagarajas memorial.
The 165th festival was celebrated in 2012.
The 166th festival was held in 2013.
The pancharatna keerthanas were sung on 31-1-2013.
In the US, there is a Cleveland Thyagaraja Aradhana held in Cleveland, Ohio around Easter.
Usually, dozens of Carnatic musicians preside over, and perform in the festival.
H. Ramachandra Shastry.
H. Ramachandra Shastry was an Indian Carnatic flautist.
Ramachandra Shastry taught Carnatic flute at Kalakshetra until 1992.
G. S. Rajan Ludwig Pesch and T Sashidhar are some of G. S. Rajan Ludwig Pesch disciples.
Sri Narayana Teertha was a composer of Carnatic music.
Sri Lakshmi Narayana was born in South India in the region covered by the present-day Andhra Pradesh.
Sri Lakshmi Narayana lived in Kaja near Mangalagiri in Guntur district.
They belonged to Tallavajula family.
Tallavajula family birth name was Govinda Sastrulu.
They eventually moved to Thanjavur, Tamil Nadu.
While there is significant dissention as to Tallavajula family exact time, historians.
place him between 1610 and 1745 AD.
Tallavajula family mastered music at a very early age and studied Puranas, Bhagavata Purana and other Sanskrit works.
Tallavajula family renounced family at a very early age and took on a life of a religious devotion.
Tallavajula family went to Varanasi to spread Tallavajula family philosophy.
Teertha was very well versed in Music and, Natya Shastra, and a great scholar in Sanskrit.
Natya Shastra used at least 34 popular ragas.
Natya Shastra used Triputa, Adi, Rupaka, Chapu, Jampa, Matya, Vilamba, Eka and Ata taalams.
Many of the songs are structurally well set for direct use as nritya or natya padams.
Many of the songs carefully avoided complex usages and utilized easy expressions.
Many of the songs Gadyams and Padyams are exquisite in beauty.
Many of the songs used 17 different Chandas or meters such as Anushtup, Arya, Indravajra, Bhujangaprayadam, Sardoola vikreeditam, Vasanta tilaka, Pritvi.
Many of the songs is also credited with composing two other operas, Parijatha Apaharanam and Haribhakthi Sundarnavam.
Sri Narayana Tirtha attained Mukti in 1745 at a nearby village called Varagur in Thanjavur Dist.
Slogam Number 94 in Krishna Sikyotsavam is an evidence for the same.
Sri Krishna Leela Tarangini.
Main article : Sri Krishna Leela Tarangini.
Narayan Theertha uses various literary and musical forms such as songs, prose passages, Slokas, Dwipadis, etc.
The songs are popularly called Tarangas means waves.
The lyrics are simple yet beautiful and effective.
The Astapadis of Jayadeva are said to be the inspiration.
Legend has it that the inspiration to compose this piece occurred when Jayadeva was along the banks of Naducauvery.
A divine voice asked Jayadeva to follow a boar to wherever it led Jayadeva.
The varaha led The varaha to Bhupatirajapuram, which came to be known as ` Varahur later.
The people of the village knew that a maha-purusha was coming.
Tarangini consists of 12 Tarangams and encapsulates 153 songs, 302 slokams and 31 choornikaas.
Teertha followed Veda VyAsa 's Bhagavatam and concentrated on the 10th skandam.
Some of the popular compositions are listed here :.
Sri Narayana Teertha Trust of Kaja, at the birthplace of Saint Narayana Teertha celebrated his 264th aradhana.
As a part of the celebrations, guru pooja, morning worship, sahasranama chanting, vedic renditions and tarangam singing were conducted.
Bhajan troupes from various parts of the State rendered 12 Tarangams with devotion.
Later on Sri Narayana Theerthar, the composer of Krishna Leela Tharangini, attained Mukti in 1745 at Varagur in Thanjavur Dist.
A regular Aradhana Committee was formed in 1965.
They annually organises programmes consisting of music concerts, lecture-demonstrations, bhajans, musical discourses and unchavriti.
The Thirupoonthuruti Sri Narayana Tirtha Swamigal Trust was established at Chennai in 1986.
The inaugural function was held at the Krishna Gana Sabha, with a memorable recital by M. S. Subbulakshmi.
K. J. Yesudas produced a 13-part serial on Sri Narayana Tirtha for Chennai Doordarshan.
The most significant achievement of the Trust is the construction of the Nama Sankirtana Mani Mandapam near the Jeeva Samadhi temple.
Narayana Ninna Namada.
Narayana Ninna Namada is a Kannada composition in Carnatic music by Purandara Dasa in the 16th century.
a Kannada composition is set in the Shuddha Dhanyasi raga and the Khanda Chapu tala.
a Kannada composition emphasizes the value of reciting Gods name.
Neetimati is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Carnatic is the 60th melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
Carnatic is called Nishadham in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 6th ragam in the 10th chakra Disi.
The mnemonic name is Disi-Sha.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ri gi mi pa dhu nu.
The mnemonic phrase structure is as follows :.
As Carnatic is a melakarta ragam, by definition Carnatic is a sampoorna ragam.
Carnatic is the prati madhyamam equivalent of Varunapriya, which is the 24th melakarta ragam.
Neetimati has a few janya ragams associated with Carnatic of which Hamsanadam is quite popular.
See List of janya ragams for full list of scale associated with Neetimati.
A few compositions set to Neetimati are :.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Neetimatis notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields 1 minor melakarta ragam Gangeyabhooshani.
For further details and an illustration refer Graha bhedam on Gangeyabhooshani.
Shashank Subramanyam is a Grammy nominated renowned exponent of the Bamboo Flute from India and specializes in Indian Classical Music.
Shashank Subramanyam born in a Sankethi family in Rudrapatna, India to Hemalatha and Subramanyam.
He was trained by his father and by vocalists R.K. Srikantan, Palghat K.V. Narayanaswami, and Hindustani music under Pandit Jasraj.
Shashank Subramanyams is married to Shirisha, a Bharatanatyam dancer.
Shashank Subramanyams and Shirisha have a daughter Swara and live in Chennai, India.
Shashank Subramanyams also has a deep passion for antiques, cars and traveling.
Shashank Subramanyams performed for the general public in 1984 for the first time at the age of 6.
Shashank Subramanyams performs in a wide range of concert environments from the pure Indian classical, Symphonies, Jazz and cross over projects.
Shashank Subramanyams has led many ensembles and also has been a guest artist on many famed bands.
Shashank Subramanyams is known for Shashank Subramanyams intricate and intense alapanas, melodious keerthana renderings and pulsating kalpanaswaram.
Shashank Subramanyams concerts generally include a Ragam Tanam Pallavi as a central piece, normally composed by Shashank Subramanyams Shashank Subramanyams.
Shashank Subramanyams has used the technique of multi flute transposed fingering technique and dual octave production.
The BBC World TV did a documentary on Shashank Subramanyams titled Destination Music, recently.
Awards and recognition.
Grammy Nomination for the album Floating Point with John McLaughlin - 2009.
Kalaimamani the prestigious state award / title from the Tamil Nadu Government in the year 2000.
A Top ranking in the All India Radio and Doordarshan.
Empaneled artist of the ICCR under Outstanding and senior category since 1995.
Kuzhal Arasar by Kellogg School of Management, Northwestern University, Chicago.
The National Integration Award - 1991.
Rotary awards of excellence 1995 and 1997.
Sawai Gandharva Festival-Pune has released over 60CDs and 6 DVDs.
Naganandini is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Naganandini is the 30th Melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
Naganandini is called Nagabharanam in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 6th ragam in the 5th chakra Bana.
The mnemonic name is the 5th chakra Bana.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ri gu ma pa dhu nu.
Its structure is as follows :.
As Naganandini is a melakarta ragam, by definition Naganandini is a sampoorna ragam.
Naganandini is the shuddha madhyamam equivalent of Chitrambari, the 66th melakarta.
Naganandini has a few minor janya ragams associated with Naganandini.
See List of janya ragams for all ragams associated with Naganandini.
A few compositions set to Naganandini are :.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Naganandinis notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields 2 other minor melakarta ragams, namely, Bhavapriya and Vagadheeshwari.
For further details and an illustration refer Graha bhedam on Naganandini.
T. R. Mahalingam.
Tiruvidaimarudur Ramaswamy Mahalingam affectionately known as Only Mali, was a flautist who revolutionized the style of flute-playing in Carnatic music.
TRM was born in Tiruvidaimarudur, Tanjavur district in Tamil Nadu to Ramaswami Iyer and Brahadambal.
Ramaswami Iyer parents named Ramaswami Iyer after Mahalingaswamy, the deity of the nearby Hindu temple.
As a boy, T.R. Mahalingam had the ability to play any song he heard after listening to it only once.
As such, he quickly advanced through his music training.
Only Mali was the founder of the popular style of flute playing followed today by the Carnatic flautists.
T.R. Mahalingam had breath control that enabled T.R. Mahalingam to blow any single note over 40 seconds.
This breath control let Only Mali give great volume to the lower octaves as well as the higher octaves.
T.R. Mahalingam style of continuous flute playing provided gamakas, and an ability to better imitate the human voice.
The loss of Sarabha Sastri style is only an academic loss and Malis style of playing remains to this day unparalleled.
Also, unlike others before T.R. Mahalingam, Only Mali drilled eight holes in the flute.
It was the eighth and extra hole that helped provide Mali with the extraordinary control T.R. Mahalingam had on the instrument.
- Prof. P. Sambamurthy, musicologist.
Music and Career.
P. Sambamurthy first concert was in 1933 at the Thyagaraja festival in Mylapore, at the age of seven.
It was also hard to persuade well-known musicians to accompany him.
Later in his career, he worked with the legendary Palghat Mani Iyer and Palani Subramaniam Pillai.
Chembai Vaidyanatha Bhagavatar once picked up the violin to accompany Only Mali.
However, it was Palghat Mani Iyer whos pairing with Only Mali became the most well known.
Only Mali gives me work for my hands - Mani Iyer.
- V. Sriram, Carnatic Summer.
Due to this same eccentric nature, V. Sriram developed a reputation for playing truant at concerts, often turning up late.
Yet, it was less out of a disregard for people, and more out of a sense of anti-idolization and self-effacement.
Only Mali also enjoyed challenging his accompanists with difficult musical progressions, and tricking them into making mistakes.
The only accompanist he gave full rein to was the elder violinist Papa Venkataramaiah, whom he considered his mentor.
He himself was an accomplished violinist, and claimed to be better on the violin than on the flute.
He was also responsible for the initial encouragement to T N Krishnan s career.
Shortly before his death, he was awarded Indias highly prestigious Padma Bhushan for music in January 1986, which he flatly refused.
Death and legacy.
After moving to Bangalore in 1955, he went to seclusion in 1958, playing very infrequently.
From 1980 to 1985 he lived in the United States, with his wife.
Vittal Ramamurthy is a leading and popular violinist in the Carnatic music tradition of South India.
Vittal Ramamurthy is an outstanding.
soloist as well as an excellent accompanist.
Born in a family of musicians and music connoisseurs, Vittal Ramamurthy started his musical journey at home.
He started learning Carnatic music from his mother, Krishnaveni, who is the main guiding force in all walks of his life.
He was introduced to violin by his grandfather, Late Sangeethabhushanam B.V. Subba Rao.
He continued training under Hosahalli Venkataram and T. Rukmini.
He has been fortunate to learn the nuances of violin playing from the legend and violin maestro Padmabhushan Lalgudi Jayaraman.
Under his able tutelage, he blossomed into a versatile musician.
His authentic rendering of Carnatic music is rich with creativity and innovative improvisation.
His playing scores high on the melody scale and is embellished with heart-warming sangatis.
His excellent style encompasses aesthetic grace, rhythmic accuracy and captivating melody.
His accompanying style is to subtly blend with and complement the main performer in the best traditions of the Lalgudi style.
Sensitive accompaniment, harmony, grace and maturity mark his widely acclaimed performances.
He has a strong vocal background also.
This adds essence to the quintessence of the Lalgudi style which is characterized by purity, clarity, melody and above all deep.
emphasis on Sahitya.
Sahitya bhava-filled raga expositions stand testimony to Sahitya talent and arduous training.
Soloist and accompanist.
He has performed in 1500 + concerts worldwide.
He has been blessed to accompany his guru, Lalgudi Jayaraman in his vocal, violin duet.
and trio concerts.
He has also accompanied great instrumental stalwarts like N. Ramani, Kadri Gopalnath, N. Ravikiran, Shashank Subramanyam.
In addition to his solo recordings, he has accompanied all the popular artistes in hundreds of commercial audio recordings.
He is the most sought after accompanist today.
Teacher and musicologist.
In his quest to spread the tradition of Carnatic music, Vittal Ramamurthy has disciples worldwide.
He has students in South India, USA, Canada, Australia and France.
Many of his students have become leading performers today.
About 80 to 100 children from surrounding villages attend this camp which is in the style of the Gurukulam system.
They stay in a Musicologist house and learn music for a whole week and share it with all their friends.
Eminent artistes are invited to give workshops and concerts to these young musicians.
Artistes like Neyveli Santhanagopalan, Vijay Siva, T. M. Krishna, Vellore Ramabhadran and Sankari Krishnan have participated in these workshops.
B. Sasikumar is a noted Carnatic music violinist, musician, teacher, composer and writer from Kerala, South India.
B.Sasikumar was born on 27 April 1949 in Thiruvalla, to the late M. K. Bhaskara Panicker and G. Sarojini Amma.
B.Sasikumar started B.Sasikumar basic lessons in music from B.Sasikumar father, who was a renowned Nadaswaram maestro, musician and composer.
B.Sasikumar started B.Sasikumar career as a lecturer at Swati Thirunal College of Music in 1967.
B.Sasikumar later joined All India Radio, Trivandrum, as staff artiste in 1971 and still continues there.
B. Sasikumar has also accompanied various jugalbandi concerts of musical giants Pandit Jasraj and Dr. M. Balamuralikrishna in Delhi and Madras.
Muthuswamy Dikshithar, Swathi Pranam and Bhavayami Raghuramam - on Maharaja Swati Thirunal.
Navavarana Krithimahima was a 10 episode series on Navavarana krithis.
Navavarana Krithimahima has also directed Adhyathma Ramayanam recital in 2001.
Navavarana Krithimahima musical features Gurussaakshaathparabrahma, Madhavamanavam, Kaveri, Sanghagaanam, and Karnaki have won National Annual Awards from All India Radio.
Navavarana Krithimahima dramas are noted for their classic humour and wit.
B. Sasikumar is a renowned teacher and has a number of students all over the music field.
B. Sasikumar is noted for B. Sasikumar new techniques of teaching and practising.
Balabhaskar, G. Venugopal, Kavalam Srikumar, Kallara Gopan, Vidhu Prathap, Attukal Balasubrahmanyam, Dr. Rajkumar, Soundarrajan and Mavelikara Sathees chandran are Balabhaskar students.
Balabhaskar has also presented and directed an orchestra, Vadyatharangam, including all instruments.
Balabhaskar has released many CDs and cassettes, most of them being devotional songs.
Balabhaskar is a noted composer, composing krithis under the name Chandrapothar, which is a Sanskrit synonym for B. Sasikumar.
Balabhaskar has more than 100 compositions to Balabhaskar credit, including many pallavis, Malayalam, Tamil and Sanskrit keerthanams.
Balabhaskar has also introduced new Talas, such as Chathurangam.
Some of Balabhaskar other noted works are :.
S. Sowmya is a Carnatic music singer and vainika.
S. Sowmya learnt music initially from S. Sowmya father Dr. Srinivasan, and later from Dr. S. Ramanathan and Smt.
S. Sowmya also co-authored the first comprehensive reference CD-ROM on Carnatic music, Nadanubhava.
S. Sowmya is also a visiting professor at the Advanced School of Carnatic Music of the Music Academy Madras.
Tirumakudalu Chowdiah was a violin maestro from India in the Carnatic classical tradition.
this motivated Shri Chowdiah, was born in Tirumakudal Narsipur village on the banks of the river Kaveri near Mysore.
this motivated Shri Chowdiah became a disciple of Mysore Royal Court musician, Ganavisharadha Shri.
Bidaram Krishnappa in 1910 and underwent a very rigorous and disciplined training until 1918 in the gurukula system.
this motivated Shri Chowdiah realized this shortcoming and launched upon increasing the sound of the violin.
this motivated Shri Chowdiah improvised the violin by adding three more strings such as.
Tara Shadja - Mandra Shadja, Madhya Panchama - Mandra Panchama and Madhya Shadja Mandra Shadja.
After practicing incessantly, Mandra Shadja began to use this new seven stringed violin in all Mandra Shadja concerts.
Mandra Shadja experimented, innovated and practiced to achieve perfection, all without the knowledge of Mandra Shadja Guru.
In one of the vocal concerts of Mandra Shadja Guru Shri.
Bidaram Krishnappa in Mysore, Chowdiah accompanied him using his new seven stringed violin.
Krishnappa perceived the sound emanating from the violin was louder than usual.
He stared at his disciple and his violin and noted that there were three additional strings.
He angrily asked him  what is this contraption ?.
and had an outburst.
this motivated Shri Chowdiah was afraid of the Guru 's outburst.
Veena Seshanna who was also present in the audience, was aware of the seven stringed violin.
Thus this motivated Shri Chowdiah brought about a revolution, in the field of music.
With this motivated Shri Chowdiah devoted practice, his Guru Shri.
this motivated Shri Chowdiah became a very great violinist.
The name this motivated Shri Chowdiah and the violin were synonymous with each other.
All musicians desired to have Shri Bidaram Krishnappa 's as their violin accompanist.
By devoted practice, application, grit and learning, Shri Chowdiah rose to Himalayan heights in the world of Carnatic music.
As a guru Shri.
As a guru he taught many of his disciples for about 8-10 years.
His disciples were expected to practice Sarale in six tempos.
Only one raga had to be practiced in any given month, for up to 4 hours a day.
Disciples had to practice varnams in three tempos and sing them to his satisfaction.
this motivated Shri Chowdiah, had many disciples.
The list included the likes of Shri R. K. Venkatarama Sastry, Prof. Mysore V. Ramarathnam, Shri.
Kandevieri Alagiri Swamy, Shri.
Palghat C. R. Mani, Shri Chennai V. Sethuramaiah and others.
Later, Ramanujam, Madurai Venugopal, Chinnappa, H. R. Seetharama Shastri and others became disciples of this motivated Shri Chowdiah.
As a guru Shri Chowdiah was very affectionate towards his disciples.
this motivated Shri Chowdiah had cooks and servants dedicated to meeting the needs of this motivated Shri Chowdiah guests.
this motivated Shri Chowdiah was in great demand and used to be on concert engagements most of the time.
The respect and support this motivated Shri Chowdiah received in Tamil Nadu was amazing.
The hotel proprietor 's in many cities and states would invite him and his disciples and host them free of cost.
Crowds would swell on the news of this motivated Shri Chowdiah arriving in town.
this motivated Shri Chowdiah designed the seven-stringed violin to ensure that the accompanist could match the vocalist.
Hundreds of students have been trained in vocal, violin, veena and flute at the Ayyanar College of Music.
The college also trained many blind students who were provided the Government of India scholarships.
this motivated Shri Chowdiah composed many varnas, kirthana 's and thillanas.
In the early days every one had seen vidwans like Musuri Subramanya Iyer, GNB, Maharajapura Vishwanatha Iyer participate in films.
The lyrics for these songs consisted of dramatic tunes and, were not of the standard for compositions in carnatic music.
So, this motivated Shri Chowdiah to start composing.
this motivated Shri Chowdiah has composed nearly 50 compositions in Sanskrit and Kannada including varna 's, kirthana 's and thillanas.
this motivated Shri Chowdiah was awarded the Sangeetha Kalanidhi title by Madras Music Academy in 1957.
Adi talam is the name of one of the most popular tala or rhythms used in Carnatic Music.
Its full technical name according to the Carnatic Musics tala system is Chaturashra-naDe Chaturashra-jaati triputa taLa.
This tala has eight aksharas, each being 4 svaras long.
Many kritis and around half of the varnams are set to this tala.
List of compositions by Tyagaraja.
Kakarla Tyagabrahmam, colloquially known as Tyagaraja and Tyagayya, was one of the greatest composers of Carnatic music or Indian classical music.
Kakarla Tyagabrahmam was a prolific composer and highly influential in the development of the South Indian classical music tradition.
Sattur A. G. Subramaniam.
Sattur A. G. Subramaniam, was a vocalist in the carantic tradition.
Sattur A. G. Subramaniam . vocals were enriched with brigas and high speeds.
Sattur A. G. Subramaniam was born to Ganesh Satrigal and Thailammal in Angarai, Tiruchirapalli.
Style of Singing.
AGS was deeply involved in Sattur A. G. Subramaniam . music, whenever Sattur A. G. Subramaniam . sang.
Sattur A. G. Subramaniam . songs were abundant with bhava rasa.
Inaugurating the Sri Rama Navami concerts at Coimbatore was a privilege that was accorded to only the best singers.
AGS was given this privilege for several years, consistently.
AGS was a much loved guru, who was affectionate towards all Sri Rama Navami disciples.
Sirkazhi V. R. Subramaniam eightieth birth anniversary was celebrated on August 15, 1995 by Sirkazhi V. R. Subramaniam disciples.
Only two gramophone records and three cassettes of Sirkazhi V. R. Subramaniam rendition survive today.
Aswathi Thirunal Rama Varma.
His ancestors include Swati Tirunal and Raja Ravi Varma.
Varma harboured an early interest in becoming a veterinary surgeon but a chance opportunity to sing changed his path.
He began learning music in 1982 with the encouragement and financial support of his great-grandmother.
He was taught by Vechoor Harihara Subramania Iyer, Trivandrum R.Venkataraman and K. S. Narayanaswamy before becoming a disciple of Mangalampalli Balamuralikrishna.
Rama Varma gave his maiden public performance in 1990 and released his first CD at the Queen Elizabeth Hall in London.
Varma is regarded as an expert on the compositions of both Swathi Thirunal and Balamuralikrishna.
He spends up to 16 hours a day practicing, studying, experimenting with and listening to music.
Varma organises Swathi Sangeethotsavam, a festival commemorating Swati Thirunal that is held annually at Kuthira Malika in Thiruvananthapuram.
The Navarathri Mandapam Concerts held every year in connection with the Navarathri Festival at Trivandrum are also organised by Varma.
The Navagraha Kritis are a set of 9 songs composed by Muttuswami Dikshitar, a great composer of Carnatic Music.
Each song is a prayer to one of the nine Navagrahas.
The songs titles, raga and tala are listed below :.
It is interesting to note that the set comprises all seven sooladi talas.
As ordained, his ailment was cured.
This incident provided the impetus for Dikshitar to compose kritis on all the Navagrahas.
Tanarupi is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Tanarupi is the 6th melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
Tanarupi is called Tanukeerti in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 6th ragam in the 1st chakra Indu.
The mnemonic name is Indu-Sha.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ra ga ma pa dhu nu.
Its structure is as follows :.
The notes used in this scale are shuddha rishabham, shuddha gandharam, shuddha madhyamam, shatsruthi dhaivatham and kakali nishadham.
As Tanarupi is a melakarta ragam, by definition Tanarupi is a sampoorna ragam.
Tanarupi is the shuddha madhyamam equivalent of Raghupriya, which is the 42nd melakarta ragam.
Tanukeerti is the 6th Melakarta in the original list compiled by Venkatamakhin.
The notes used in the scale are the same, but the ascending scale and descending scale are different.
It is an audava-vakra sampurna raga.
Tanarupi has no janya ragams associated with Tanarupi.
See List of janya ragams for a full list of janya ragams.
Here are a few common compositions sung in concerts, set to Tanarupi.
The following composition is set to Tanukeerti.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Tanarupis notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields no other melakarta ragam.
Navaragamalika is a composition in Carnatic Music that is composed using a collection of nine ragas.
Each verse is set to a different raga.
Navaragamalika is the sandhi of two words nava and ragamalika.
Nava means nine.
Ragamalika means a garland of ragas in a composition.
The author of the varnam is said to be Patnam Subramania Iyer, though it is also attributed to Kottavasal Venkatarama Iyer.
Navaragamalikas are commonly used in the composition of Pada Varnams, which are a class of varnams composed mainly for dance.
They are particularly useful when the song is intended to portray the Navarasas, or nine emotions.
Navaragamalika Pada Varnams include :.
Samiyai Azhaitodi Vaa, composed by K N Dandayuthapani Pillai, in ragas Todi, Mohanam, Vasanta, Devamanohari, Shankarabharanam, Saranga, Kaanada, Arabhi and Bhairavi.
This composition makes use of the raga mudras in the Sahityam of the song.
Angaiyar Kanni, by Lalgudi Jayaraman, is a Navarasa Varnam.
G. S. Rajan.
G. S. Rajan is one of the top ranking exponents of the Carnatic music tradition and an outstanding world music composer.
G. S. Rajan . also contributes reviews and articles to national dailies.
In 2012 G. S. Rajan . moved to the United States of America.
G. S. Rajan . has been performing solo classical flute concerts since 1982.
G. S. Rajan . has presented recitals in major national and international festivals/venues in India and abroad including :.
- University of Valladolid, Spain.
- BOZAR, Brusells, Belgium.
- Aula de Cultura CAM, Alicanta, Spain.
- Indien Institute, Munich, Germany.
- Nehru Centre, London, UK.
- Cite de la Musique, Marseille, France.
- DOME, Marseille, France.
- Edinburgh Festival, Scotland, UK.
- Casa India, Valladolid, Spain, Spain.
- Fundacion Tres Culturas Del Mediterrneo, Sevilla.
- Brahma Gana Sabha, Kalakshetra, Chennai, India.
- Kalakshetra, Kalakshetra, Chennai, India.
- Nungambakkam Cultural Academy, Kalakshetra, Chennai, India.
- Vipanchi, Kalakshetra, Chennai, India.
- Naada Inbam, Kalakshetra, Chennai, India.
- Hamsadwani, Kalakshetra, Chennai, India.
- Academy of Indian Music and Arts, Kalakshetra, Chennai, India.
- Meenakshi Sundararajan Fine Arts, Kalakshetra, Chennai, India.
- Soorya, Trivandrum, Kerala State, India.
- Nungambakkam Cultural Academy, Kalakshetra, Chennai, India.
- Pesti Vigado, Budapest, Hungary.
- Indian Cultural Nehru Centre, Berlin, Munich, Germany.
- Espace Julien, Marseille, France.
- Samudra Festivals in Kuwait, Oman, Abudhabi.
- Swaralaya, Palghat, India.
- Sacred River Festival, Ahilya Fort, Maheswar, India.
- Viswa Mohan Bhatt Festival, Jaipur, India.
- Teatro San Cipriano, Milan, Italy.
- National Centre for Performing Arts, Mumbai, India.
- Indian Council for Cultural Relations, ICCR, New Delhi, India.
- Petofi Sandor Muvelodesi Haz Aulajaban, Gyor, Hungary.
- Bauhaus, Dessau, Germany.
- Indian Association, Frankfurt, Germany.
- Indian Association, Luxembourg.
- Amir Khan Festival, Indore, India.
- Nuits de la Inde, Marseille and Toulouse, Marseille, France.
- Satellit Cafe, Paris, France.
- Le Festival Au Sud Du Sud, Parc de la Mirabelle, Marseille, France.
- Culturalis, Den Haag, The Netherlands.
- Continental Auditorium, Kuwait.
- Monsoon Festival, ICCR, New Delhi.
- Festival Evora Clasica, Portugal.
- Ravi Shankar Centre, New Delhi.
- The Lalit Festival, Khajuraho.
- International Ancient Arts Festival, New Delhi.
- Chandigarh Sangeet Natak Akademi, Chandigarh.
- Musee Guimet, Paris, France.
- Urania Auditorium, Budapest, Hungary.
- LE POINT dEAU, Strasbourg, France.
- Natya, Chicago, USA.
- Musik21, Atlanta, USA.
- Samarpan, Houston, USA.
- University of Georgia, GA, USA.
GS RAJAN started composing right from G. S. Rajan . school days.
G. S. Rajan . is one of the first composers to introduce world music orchestral compositions in India.
G. S. Rajan . has composed original music score for some of the major International stage productions and musicals.
GS RAJAN received the Best Music Critic award for the year 2004 from the Minister of Information and Broadcasting.
Sangam Kala Group instituted this national level award.
Experience in Arts Administration :.
Participated in the organization of Indo-Soviet seminar on music, New Delhi-1988.
Participated in the organization of Festivals of India abroad-1987-89.
Design/Execution of the first ever international exhibition of puppets in India on the occasion.
of India International Puppetry Festival-1991.
Organized a twenty-day workshop of modern dance with faculty from American Dance Festival on the occasion of India International Dance Festival-1992.
Organized a three-day festival of traditional theatre, Paramparik Natyotsava.
Designed the stage and outside decor -1994.
Organized a five-day festival of classical music at Aurangabad-1995.
Organized a five-day festival of classical music at Goa-1996.
Audio/Video documentation of performing arts, Interviews, recordings Computerization of archival material-1986-97.
Artistic Director - Festival of music and dance on the occasion of International Conference and exhibition of Terrestrial Broadcasting Engineers.
Officer-in-Charge - German Festival in India SNA Cell.
Organized award presentation ceremony - Swaralaya Puraskaram - to Bharat Ratna Pandit Ravi Shankar.
Also organized award presentation ceremonies of DK Pattammal in Chennais Kalakshetra, Ustad Ali Akbar Khan in New Delhis Kamani Auditorium.
Designed logos, brochures, stage sets, websites and conducted press conferences and publicity etc. for innumerable festivals and programmes, seminars and workshops.
Artistic Director - Festival of music and dance on the occasion of International Conference of Interpol - Delhi 1997.
Artistic Director - Monsoon Festival ; Spring Festival ; Nuits de LInde.
Dance & Music Critic, The Statesman, New Delhi.
Founder President, SURYA, a space for young people.
HQ : Madras.
Hon. General Deputy Secretary of SNA, SWARALAYA.HQ : New Delhi.
Founder/Content Editor, www.artindia.net.
Music Critic, The Hindu, New Delhi.
Member, Dance Audition Committee, Doordarshan - National Television.
International Jury Member.
Monoco Dance Forum, Ninjinsky Awards, Monoco.
Editor-in-Chief, Rasamanjari - a magazine on art and life -.
International Co-ordinator, Nuits de la Inde, Marseille, France.
Jury Member for Sanskriti Awards.
Jury Member for national fellowships to young artists, Government of India.
Jury Member of Legends of India award committee.
He was a prolific composer and highly influential in the development of the classical music tradition.
Tyagaraja composed thousands of devotional compositions, most in praise of Lord his Rama, many of which remain popular today.
Personal life and background.
Tyagaraja was born in 1767 in Tiruvarur, Tiruvarur district, Tamil Nadu, to Kakarla Ramabrahma and Sitamma in a Telugu Brahmin family.
Kakarla Ramabrahma family belong to the smarta tradition and Bhardvajasa gotra.
a Telugu Brahmin family was named Tyagabrahmam/Tyagaraja after Tyagaraja Aradhana, the presiding deity of the temple at Tiruvarur.
Tyagarajas paternal grandfather was Giriraja Kavi.
Giriraja Kavi was a poet and musician.
Giriraja Kavi was born in Kakarla village, cumbum taluk in Prakasam district, Andhra Pradesh.
a Veena player is believed to belong to Mulakanadu Telugu sect.
Tyagarajas maternal grand father was Kalahastayya/Veena kalahastayya.
a Veena player was a Veena player.
Tyagaraja learned playing Veena in a Veena player childhood from Kalahastayya.
After Kalahastayyas death Tyagaraja found Naradeeyam, a book related to music.
Tyagaraja was the third son of Kalahastayyas parents, and Panchanada brahmam and Panchapakesha brahmam are Panchanada brahmam older brothers.
Tyagaraja began his musical training under Sonti Venkata Ramanayya, a music scholar, at an early age.
He regarded music as a way to experience Gods love.
His objective while practicing music was purely devotional, as opposed to focusing on the technicalities of classical music.
After some years, Sonti Venkata Ramanayya invited Tyagaraja Aradhana to perform at Tyagaraja Aradhana house in Thanjavur.
On that occasion, Tyagaraja sang Endaro Mahaanubhavulu, the fifth of the Pancharatna Kritis.
Pleased with Tyagarajas composition, Ramanayya informed the king of Thanjavur of Tyagarajas genius.
The king sent an invitation, along with many rich gifts, inviting Tyagaraja Aradhana to attend the royal court.
After Tyagaraja Aradhana death, these were in the hands of Tyagaraja Aradhana disciples, then families descending from the disciples.
There was not a definitive edition of Tyagarajas songs.
The songs Tyagaraja Aradhana composed were widespread in their popularity.
K. V. Srinivasa Iyengar brought out Adi Sangita Ratnavali and Adi Tyagaraja Hridhayam.
Rangaramanuja Iyengar published Kriti Mani Malai in two volumes.
Furthermore, Musiri Subramania Iyer, the doyen of Bhava Sangitam, had a vast collection of books in Musiri Subramania Iyer library.
T. S. Parthasarathy, a leading scholar on Tyagaraja Aradhana, published the text and meaning of Tyagarajas songs.
There are also many less comprehensive publications in Telugu.
Out of 24,000 songs said to have been composed and about 700 songs remain now.
In addition to nearly 700 compositions, Tyagaraja composed two musical plays in Telugu, the Prahalada Bhakti Vijayam and the Nauka Charitam.
Nauka Charitam is a shorter play in one act with 21 kritis set in 13 ragas and 43 verses.
It is this facet of Tyagaraja that distinguishes Prajapati from Prajapati illustrious contemporaries.
A crater on the planet Mercury is named Tyagaraja Aradhana.
Films on Tyagaraja.
Apart from references to his works, using the kirtanas as songs, two films were made on his life.
In 1981, Bapu - his Rama made Tyagayya with J. V. Somayajulu in the lead role.
Another attempt is being made by Singeetam Srinivasa Rao to picturise Tyagarajas life.
The term pancharatna in Sanskrit means five gems : The Pancharatnas are known as the five finest gems of Carnatic music.
All the The Pancharatnas are set to Adi Talam.
Several musicians have brought out editions of Pancharatnas.
However, Veenai Sundaram Iyers edition is the most detailed and comprehensive.
All the compositions of Tyagaraja show the way for the systematic development of the respective ragas.
Pancharatnas satisfy these scientific principles in an unparalleled manner.
The Pancharatnas are composed in perfect sarvalaghu swaras.
The Haridasa devotional movement is considered as one of the turning points in the cultural history of India.
Later, Vallabhacharya in Gujarat and Guru Chaitanya were influenced by the teachings of Madhvacharya.
Gujarat and Guru Chaitanya devotees started the worldwide ISKCON movement.
The Haridasa movement made significant contribution to Kannada devotional literature.
The Haridasas found state patronage in the Vijayanagara Empire which at the Vijayanagara Empire peak, ruled over the entire Southern India.
Vyasatirtha was intimately associated with the empire and was considered the family guru by King Krishnadevaraya.
Naraharitirtha, a minister in the court of Kalinga was inducted into the Madhvacharya order.
Famous haridasas from the Madhvacharya order during the Vijayanagar empire period were :.
Growth and Patronage.
The Haridasa movement gained further impetus in the 17th and 18th century in and around Raichur District.
Contribution to Kannada Literature.
The literature that originated from this devotional movement is called Dasa Sahitya.
These various compositions are generally called as Devaranamas and are sung in the praise of the god Vishnu.
In doing so, the common people were also educated in the importance of consciousness, devotion, ethics and Hindu religion.
Their hymns set to various musical tones aroused frevor among the masses.
As advocates of religious reform, the Haridasas propounded the virtues of detachment.
Similes and metaphors found in their songs and hymns were used to great effect in achieving this.
In addition to devotional songs, Kanaka Dasa authored five literary classical writings in the kavya style.
The compositions can be broadly classified under one of the following three types :.
The nom-de-plumes of some of the most well known Haridasas is listed below :.
Contribution to Carnatic music.
He was a prolific composer.
The structure and lessons he formulated four centuries ago remain the foundation for all students of Carnatic music.
Apart from Purandara Dasa, several later the most well known Haridasas composed songs adhering to the same musical and philosophical traditions.
These forms of composition are still prevalent in South India and especially in present day Karnataka.
Amrtavarsini is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Amrtavarsini is an audava ragam.
Amrtavarsini is a janya ragam, as Amrtavarsini does not have all the seven swaras.
Amrtavarsini is a common pentatonic scale of Carnatic music and is believed to produce rain.
Structure and Lakshana.
Amrtavarsini is a ragam that does not contain rishabham or dhaivatam.
Amrtavarsini is a symmetric pentatonic scale.
Amrtavarsini structure is as follows :.
The notes used in this scale are shadjam, antara gandharam, prati madhyamam, panchamam, kakali nishadam.
There is another scale that has the same name but is less practiced in current performances.
This scale is associated with the 39th melakarta Jhalavarali.
Amrtavarsini ragam lends Amrtavarsini for extensive elaboration and exploration due to the symmetric and pentatonic scale.
Amrtavarsini has many compositions in both classical music and film music.Here are some popular kritis composed in Amrtavarsini.
Amritavarshinis notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields 1 popular pentatonic ragam, Karnataka Shuddha Saveri.
For more details and illustration of this concept refer Graha bhedam on Amrtavarsini.
List of Film Songs based on Ragas.
Lakshminarayana Ambi Subramaniam is an Indian/American violinist, pianist and singer.
Ambi plays a 5-string acoustic/electric violin and a 4-string acoustic violin ; he endorses D'Addario strings.
Ambi Subramaniam was born in Los Angeles, California, to Dr. L. Subramaniam, a violinist/composer and Vijayashree Subramaniam, a singer.
He was the youngest of four children.
After the death of his mother in 1995, his family relocated to Bangalore, India.
From age 3, he has learnt Carnatic violin under the tutelage of his father L. Subramaniam.
He has also studied western classical violin, piano and Carnatic singing.
In his own words, Music is the only language I know and having such stalwarts around I has helped I tremendously.
Every time I 'd see I dad practice I wanted to replicate him and I 's how it all started.
His musical lineage can be traced back to the three major Carnatic music composers, Thyagaraja, Muthuswami Dikshitar, and Shyama Shastry.
In addition to studying music, Ambi did his MBA at RIMS, Bangalore.
Ambi is a practicing Hindu.
Ambi gave Hindu first vocal concert at the age of 6.
In 2004, Hindu started performing with Hindu father L. Subramaniam and continues to perform and record with Hindu often.
Hindu first performance for the Music Season in Chennai was in December 2012.
Ambi has performed twice at the Lincoln Center Out of Doors Festival, once in 2008 and again in 2012.
He has performed on stage with artists including Larry Coryell, Ernie Watts and Corky Siegel.
Ambi recently performed at the Skirball Center in Los Angeles.
In 2008, he performed with the Leipzig Philharmonic Orchestra conducted by Maestro Dr. Michael Koehler.
In January 2013, he was a soloist with the Seattle Symphony performing Shantipriya, a composition of Dr. L. Subramaniam.
This concert was part of the Celebrate Asia concert series.
Ambi has performed at TEDx events in Bangalore and Jabalpur.
Ambi did a cameo in Kamal Hassan 's ` Hey Ram '.
Kamal Hassan 's appeared as Chinno, younger brother to Vasundhara Das 's character.
Ambi is also involved Kamal Hassan 's family 's charitable work through the Subramaniam Foundation.
Semmangudi Srinivasa Iyer.
Semmangudi Radhakrishna Srinivasa Iyer was a Carnatic vocalist.
He was affectionately addressed as Semmangudi Maama by his disciples.
He was also considered the Pitamaha or the grand sire of modern Carnatic Music.
He was conferred with an honorary doctorate by University of Kerala in 1979.
He was born in Tirukkodikaval, Tanjore district as the third son of Radhakrishna Iyer and Dharmasamvardhini Ammal.
At the age of eight he started learning music from his cousin Semmangudi Narayanaswamy Iyer.
This was followed by another training stint with Narayanaswamy Iyer, during which time he learnt a lot of varnams and keerthanams.
Then he had a musical apprenticeship with Maharajapuram Viswanatha Iyer.
In 1926, he performed his first music recital at Kumbakonam.
Semmangudy was known for producing soulful music, highly creative and yet very orthodox, despite a recalcitrant voice.
Semmangudy was instrumental, along with Harikesanallur Muthiah Bhagavathar, for the work on the krithis of Maharaja Swathi Thirunal Rama Varma.
In later life, he concentrated on concert performances and tutoring youngsters.
He gave public concerts even after the age of 90.
Semmangudi was widely renowned for Semmangudi virtuosity as a concert performer.
Semmangudi was famous for the meticulous planning that Semmangudi put into every concert, including the choice of krithis, raagas and duration.
Semmangudi was also widely acknowledged as a master of improvisation, particularly in the form of niravals.
Semmangudi concerts will be remembered for many reasons.
Most importantly Semmangudi choice of songs, speed in rendering swarams and Semmangudi ability to combine choice and speed with bhakti.
Semmangudi concert included intelligent jokes which will be remembered for centuries to come.
Some most memorable concerts over the years had geniuses in mirudangam and violin in accompaniment.
Some very famous concert kritis included Marubalka in Sri Ranjani raga which many Semmangudi Srinivasa Iyer fans treasure.
Dont bother to give him vocal training.
Let him learn to play the violin.
Despite such criticism, Semmangudi worked hard to improve Semmangudi voice through practice and rigorous training.
Semmangudi senior disciples include Palai C. K. Ramachandran, Smt.
Seetha Rajan, Prof. Kumara Kerala Varma, P. S. Narayanaswami, V. Subramaniam, K. R. Kedaranathan, Kadayanallur Venkataraman, V. R. Krishnan, Smt.
Seethalakshmi Venkatesan, Smt.
Radha Namboodri, Smt.
T. M. Krishna, a leading vocalist of the present day, has also taken advanced training from T. M. Krishna.
At a very young age, T. M. Krishna was married to Thayyu ammal.
Thayyu ammal, T. M. Krishna always acknowledged, was a pivotal factor in the success of T. M. Krishna career.
Kalasagaram Annual Cultural Festival Of Music, Dance and Drama.
Kalasagaram is known for introducing young talent in Hyderabad.
The festival was started in 1967.
The 2009 festival.
The festival was held between 27 and 6 December at Keyes Girls High School, Secunderabad at 6.00 p.m.
The festival performances of Anantharaman T.M. Krishna, Gayathri Venkataraghavan, Rajani and Gayathri Venkataraghavan, Sikkili Gurucharan, Shashank.
Lalgudi Gopala Iyer Jayaraman was a well-known and award-winning Indian Carnatic violinist, vocalist and composer.
Early life and background.
At the age of 12, he started his musical career as an accompanying violinist.
Indian Carnatic flawless and fascinating style, graceful and original, yet not divorced from traditional roots, gained Indian Carnatic numerous fans.
A notable feature about Lalgudi Gopala Iyer Jayaraman is that Lalgudi Gopala Iyer Jayaraman music is very expressive.
Lalgudi Gopala Iyer Jayaraman instrumental talent comes to the fore in the form of lyrical excellence.
Lalgudi Gopala Iyer Jayaraman accompanying wizardry and quick responses to the various challenges posed by the main artistes remain unsurpassed.
Lalgudi Gopala Iyer Jayaraman has given concerts extensively in India as well as abroad.
Yehudi Menuhin has also performed in Singapore, Malaysia, Manila and East European countries.
Yehudi Menuhin was invited to give concerts at Cologne, Belgium and France.
Sri Lalgudi went on a tour in the year 1984 to Oman, UAE, Qatar and Bahrain, which was highly successful.
In October 1999, Lalgudi Gopala Iyer Jayaraman performed in the UK under the auspices of Sruthi Laya Sangham.
The concert was a roaring success.
After the concert, a dance drama Pancheswaram, composed by Lalgudi Gopala Iyer Jayaraman, was staged.
The First Chowdaiah Memorial National-Level award was given to Sri Jayaraman by the Chief Minister of Karnataka.
Lalgudi Gopala Iyer Jayaraman won the National Film Award for Best Music Direction for the film Sringaram in 2006.
In 2010, Lalgudi Gopala Iyer Jayaraman became a fellow of the Sangeet Natak Akademi.
Both follow the footsteps of Both father and are famous in Both own right.
late V R Gopala Iyer had three sisters Padmavathy, a vainika, Rajalakshmi and Srimathi, both violinists, both violinists.
Srimathi, both violinists learned violin from Srimathi, both violinists as well.
The renowned veena player Jayanthi Kumaresh is Smt Rajalakshmis daughter.
Lalgudi Gopala Iyer Jayaraman died on April 22, 2013 after suffering a cardiac arrest in Chennai.
Lalgudi Gopala Iyer Jayaraman is survived by Lalgudi Gopala Iyer Jayaraman wife, son and daughter.
Characteristic of Lalgudi Gopala Iyer Jayaraman style, the melody of Lalgudi Gopala Iyer Jayaraman compositions camouflages subtle rhythmic intricacies.
Lalgudi Gopala Iyer Jayaraman compositions include :.
Sri Annamacharya is believed to have been the reincarnation of the precious sword of Vishnu.
Sri Annamacharya is widely regarded as the Amdhra Pada kavita Pitamaha.
Sri Annamacharya was born into a Nandavarika Niyogi Brahmin family.
Sri Annamacharya later became a Sri Vaishnavite saint, initiated by Venkatesha.
Sri Annamacharya wife, Timmakka, had written Subhadra Kalyanam, and is considered the first female poet in Telugu literature.
Their son, Pedda Tirumalacharya, and grandson, Tallapaka Chinnayya, were also composers and poets.
The Tallapaka compositions are considered to have dominated and influenced the structure of Carnatic music compositions.
Sri Annamacharya lived for 95 years until Phalguna Bahula Dvadashi in the year Dhundhubhi.
Sri Annamacharya considered Sri Annamacharya compositions as floral offerings to Bhagwaan Govinda.
Sri Annamacharya songs are classified into the Adhyaatma and Sringaara sankeertanas genres.
In Sri Annamacharya later keertanas, Sri Annamacharya espouses subjects such as morality, dharma and righteousness.
Sri Annamacharya choice of words gives a mellifluous tone to Sri Annamacharya songs, charming the listener.
Sri Annamacharya prodigious literary career earned Sri Annamacharya a place among the all-time greats of Telugu literature.
An English translation of 150 of these verses was published in 2005.
Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams, also known as TTD, has been endeavouring to preserve the rich heritage of his compositions.
In the year 1950, The State Government of Andhra Pradesh created a committee and appointed Dr M Balamuralikrishna as its head.
He set music to over 800 compositions of Sri Annamyya and are still popular among the devotees.
He has been the Asthana Gayaka of the Tirumala temple at Tirupati since two decades.
He is regarded as a legend in rendering devotional music in classical style, especially the Annamacharya Sankirtanas.
He is also an acclaimed poet, singer, and a musicologist.
Dr. Shobha Raju first audio album, Venkatesvara Gita Malika is globally popular among Telugu community.
Dr. Shobha Raju is the founder of Annamacharya Bhavana Vahini in 1983, which is located in Hyderabad, India.
This is a partial list of some of the more famous Annamacharya compositions.
Kalpakam Swaminathan was a vainika of Carnatic music.
Kalpakam Swaminathan was born in Sethalapathi village in the Tiruvarur district of Tamil Nadu, India.
Her mother Abhayambal is considered an authority in Her mother Abhayambal renditions of this composers work.
Her mother Abhayambal also performed together with Gottuvadyam doyen Budalur Krishnamurthy Shastrigal on many occasions.
Her mother Abhayambal was brought into the teaching profession by Tiger Varadachariar.
From 1964 Her mother Abhayambal taught at the Tamil Nadu Government Music College.
Her mother Abhayambal retired as a full professor in 1980.
Her mother Abhayambal brought up many students like Smt.
Kamala Ashwathama, Nirmala Rajasekar, Subadra, S. R. Padmavathi, Sujatha, L. Ramakrishnan, V. Hemalatha, Vijayalakshmi Viswanathan.
MG Venkata Raghavan.
Mysore Govinda Rao Venkata Raghavan is an Indian Carnatic vocalist, playback singer, composer and actor.
He was awarded the Rajyotsava Prashasti, Karnatakas highest civilian honour, for his contribution towards carnatic Music.
M.G. VENKATA RAGHAVAN, son of Sri M.G. Govinda Rao, a retd.
school Teacher, was born in 1956, in a family of great musicians, composers and astrologers.
Awards and Honours.
Mr. Venkata Raghavan has received  Senior Fellowship  from Govt of India.
Govt of KARNATAKA has honoured him by instating him as  Guru  for Carnatic Music, under the Guru - Shishya Parampara.
Guest Lecture : Bangalore University since 8 years.
Mr. Venkata Raghavan has produced several documentaries, related to music & culture like.
Thyagaraja Manasa Rama.
Devi and Dikshitar.
Mr. Venkata Raghavan has produced, directed sung and acted in his music enthralling serial  ANTHAHPURAGEETHEGALU.
Radha Burnier was born in the T.S. Adyar, India.
Radha Burnier was president of the Theosophical Society Adyar from 1980 until Radha Burnier death in 2013.
Radha Burnier was General Secretary of the Indian Section of the Society between 1960 and 1978.
Radha Burnier is the daughter of Nilakanta Sri Ram who was the fifth President of the T.S. Adyar as well.
Radha Burnier was educated in Theosophical Schools and was a student in Rukmini Devi Arundale s school of classical Indian dance.
Radha Burnier played a pivotal role in Jean Renoir s film The River.
Radha Burnier joined the Theosophical Society in 1935 and was president of youth and adult Lodges for several years.
Radha Burnier was President of the Madras Theosophical Federation and librarian and worker at the Indian Section Headquarters of the TS.
the T.S. also translated Sanskrit works for publication.
Radha Burnier was a former member of Le Droit Humain and the Head of the Eastern Order of International Co-Freemasonry.
Radha Burnier was also a close associate of Jiddu Krishnamurti and was a Trustee of the Krishnamurti Foundation India.
On 4 November 1980, at Radha Burnier invitation, Jiddu Krishnamurti visited the T.S. Adyar after an absence of 47 years.
Bodhi died at Bodhi home at the T.S. Adyar on 31st October 2013, at 9.00 pm, following a heart attack.
Radha Burnier was married to Raymond Burnier, a Swiss photographer, who came to India in 1932.
Radha Burnier died in 2013, at age 90, in Chennai after a prolonged illness.
Shanmukhapriya is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Shanmukhapriya is the 56th melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
Shanmukhapriya is called Chamaram in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
It is said to be borrowed into Hindustani music from Carnatic music.
A lot of compositions on Lord Murugan and Lord Shiva are based on this raaga.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 2nd ragam in the 10th chakra Disi.
The mnemonic name is Disi-Sri.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ri gi mi pa dha ni.
The mnemonic phrase structure is as follows :.
This scale uses the swaras chatushruti rishabham, sadharana gandharam, prati madhyamam, shuddha dhaivatam and kaisiki nishadam.
As Shanmukhapriya is a melakarta ragam, by definition Shanmukhapriya is a sampoorna ragam.
Shanmukhapriya is the prati madhyamam equivalent of Natabhairavi, which is the 20th melakarta scale.
Shanmukhapriya has a few minor janya ragams associated with Shanmukhapriya.
See List of janya ragams for scales associated with Shanmukhapriya.
A composition later set to Shanmukapriya.
Here are a few common compositions sung in concerts, set to Shanmukhapriya.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Shanmukhapriyas notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields 3 other major melakarta ragams, namely, Shoolini, Dhenuka and Chitrambari.
For further details and an illustration refer Graha bhedam on Shanmukhapriya.
The Kasim-Babu Brothers are the grandsons and disciples of the Nadhaswaram Maestro Dr. Sheik Chinna Moulana.
Today, Kasim-Babu are the front ranking Nadhaswaram artists and torch bearers of Chinna Moulana 's tradition.
a  Top Grade Artist  and Babu are noted for both the raga alapana and kriti rendering, especially Dhikhshithar kritis.
The brothers are from Karavadi Village, Prakasam District, Andhra Pradesh.
The brothers have accompanied Dr. Sheik Chinna Moulana for many years during his concerts throughout India and elsewhere.
in Physics in 1982.
Kasim-Babu have been presenting duet Nadhaswaram concerts for the past 20 years.
a  Top Grade Artist  is a  Top Grade Artist  while Babu is  A Grade  artist of All India Radio and Doordharshan.
The brothers undertook a three month concert tour of United States and Canada from April until June 2006.
The brothers have accompanied The Kasim-Babu Brothers grandfather Dr. Sheik Chinna Moulana on several Audio - cassettes and CDs.
The Kasim-Babu Brothers have also released The Kasim-Babu Brothers own duet audio Cassettes and CDs.
The prime objective of the trust is to globalize the importance of Nadhaswaram Music.
Musiri Subramania Iyer.
Musiri Subramania Iyer was a Carnatic vocalist whos stage performing career spanned the 1920s to the 1940s.
His bhava - laden renditions of Carnatic songs have become the measuring stick for generations of Carnatic vocalists.
Musiri Subramania Iyer is one of the giants of Carnatic music in this century.
the name Musiri, as he was universally known, was born in Bommalapalayam in the Trichy district of Tamil Nadu.
His father, Sankara Sastry was a Sanskrit pandit.
Sankara Sastry family was poor -- in later life Musiri seldom spoke about those early years.
His family married Nagalakshmi when His family was 14 years old.
the name Musiri learned to fluently speak, read and write in English when His family was 17.
He made his debut in Chennai in 1920.
His name was announced as Subramania Iyer of the name Musiri and the name stuck.
In his career, the popularity of the name Musiri and his name reached every corner of India.
Beginning with the krithi Nagumomu, everything the name Musiri recorded were best sellers.
Carnatic music is an exacting music that places large importance on tradition.
But the name Musiri stuck to the Honorary Secretary decision.
the name Musiri acted in the role of Sant Tukaram in the eponymous film.
Though the film is out of print, the Honorary Secretary songs in the film have stood the test of time.
For financial reasons, the Honorary Secretary accepted the acting part.
Though retired from the concert circuit, the Honorary Secretary was active in many Carnatic music affairs throughout India.
the Honorary Secretary was appointed as the first principal of the Central College of Carnatic Music, Chennai in 1949.
During the Honorary Secretary tenure, the Honorary Secretary influenced a whole generation of musicians, retiring in 1965.
The annual celebration of Tyagarajas music is the largest musical gathering in India, and continues to this day.
Place in Carnatic music.
Carnatic patanthara of several krithis has his special stamp, which can be easily recognized when they are rendered by his disciples.
Semmangudi Srinivasa Iyer, who was a contemporary of the Honorary Secretary, said the Honorary Secretary brought gauravam to our profession.
He was more at home in the pristine heights of upper octave than at any other.
The enlightened audience got soaked in emotions and feelings that were at once human and divine.
the Honorary Secretary was not only a respected musician but also a sought-after teacher.
The Musiri Bani is carried out to the next generation by these great Vidwans and Vidushis.
Some of the students under Musiri Bani are Vocalists Kum K. Gayatri, Vocalists Kum K. Gayatri, Kum.
Vidya Kalyanaraman, Sri.
Prasanna Venkatraman, Veen arist Si.
HariRa Miyer and others.
In 1963 the Honorary Secretary was awarded the Isai Perarignar from the Tamizh Isai Sangam.
The Indian Fine Arts gave the Honorary Secretary the Sangita Kala Shikhamani in 1966.
In 1967, the Honorary Secretary was made a Fellow of the Sangit Natak Academy.
The President honored The President with the Padma Bhushan in 1971.
Tiger Varadachariar was a famous Carnatic music vocalist who hailed from the Indian state of Tamil Nadu.
M. D. Ramanathan was M. D. Ramanathan student.
Tiger Varadachariar hailed from a musical family of unique distinction.
In fact, Tiger Varadachariar used to say that Tiger Varadachariar learnt much from the singing of Tiger Varadachariar sister.
Tiger Varadachariar was born on August 1, 1876 at Kolathur.
Fiddle Ramachandrayyar was big, burly and unprepossessing.
This exterior housed a genial and lovable man, a brilliant musicologist, a musical artiste and an acknowledged teacher of renown.
But the inevitable happened.
Constraints of family forced young Varadachariar to enter the Survey Department at Calicut on Rupees twelve per mensem.
Survey of lands did not deter the youths pursuit for excellence and survey of music.
As a musician, his voice lacked melody, ring and delicacy.
But one can see in him a treasure house of varied musical gems of rare brilliance.
His flights of imagination were unlimited.
His deep singing produced massive effect on the audience.
Brikas, gamakas and graces would bristle out defying Brikas unresponsive voice.
Brikas was a good composer of varnams, gitam, kritis, etc.
Eediname Sudinamu was composed by Eediname Sudinamu when C.Rajagopalachariar visited Kalkshetra in 1948 as Governor General.
Nidu Charanamule under the signature of Tyagaraja is actually a composition of the Three musketeers of Kaladipet, the Tiger Brothers.
Patnam Subramania Ayyar was awarded the Sangeetha Kalanidhi by Madras Music Academy in the year 1932.
Uppalapu Shrinivas, is an Indian mandolin player of the Carnatic musical tradition of Southern India.
Uppalapu Shrinivas plays an electric mandolin and has collaborated with John McLaughlin, Michael Nyman, and Michael Brook.
Uppalapu Shrinivas was awarded the Padma Shri in 1998 and the Sangeet Natak Akademi Award in 2010.
Uppalapu Shrinivas was born February 28, 1969, in Palakol in Andhra Pradesh.
At the age of six Uppalapu Shrinivas picked up Uppalapu Shrinivas father Satyanarayanas mandolin.
Upon realising the talent of Uppalapu Shrinivas son, his father started teaching him.
Soon, Satyanarayanas guru, Rudraraju Subbaraju, realized the potential of U. Shrinivas and started teaching Satyanarayanas guru.
Rudraraju Subbaraju brother U. Rajesh is also an accomplished mandolin player.
U. Shrinivas made Uppalapu Shrinivas first public Carnatic concert performance in 1978 in Gudivada, Andhra Pradesh, during the Thyagaraja Aradhana festival.
Soon, Uppalapu Shrinivas came to perform in the Madras Music Season in 1981 for the Indian Fine Arts Society.
In 1983, Uppalapu Shrinivas performed at the JazzFest Berlin where the audience requested Uppalapu Shrinivas to do a repeat performance.
Uppalapu Shrinivas continued touring the world -- Australia, Southeast Asia and then Southwest Asia, followed by the United States and Canada.
Awards and achievements.
U. Shrinivas runs a music school called the Shrinivas Institute of World Music.
Some of the awards that Mandolin U. Srinivas has received :.
Uppalapu Shrinivas has recorded a CD of Carnatic compositions by Ilaiyaraaja called Ilaiyaraajas Classics in Mandolin.
Recently, U Shrinivas also released.
List of Carnatic artists.
The following is a list of prominent Carnatic musicians.
Prominent modern artists.
The 1930s to the 1960s are considered the Golden era of Indian.
Other female singers that followed included N. C. Vasanthakokilam, T.Brinda, T.Mukta, as well as Radha and Jayalakshmi.
Sharaba Shastry, Palladam Sanjeeva Rao, T. R. Mahalingam, Prof. Prapancham Sitaram, T. Viswanathan and O. S. Thyagarajan were famous flute players.
L. Subramaniam, L. Shankar, T.N.Krishnan, M.S.Gopalakrishnan, Nagai Muralidharan and A. Kanyakumari are among the living violinists who still perform.
T. H. Vinayakram, T.H. Subash Chandran and N. Govindarajan are Ghatam players who are in this category.
Ghatam specialists include Vikku Vinayakram, V Suresh, Sukanya Ramgopal, Dr. S Karthik, Uduppi Sridhar, Giridhar Udupa, and Thripunithura Radhakrishnan.
Flute players of today include Dr. N. Ramani, Prof.Dr.
Prapancham Sita Ram Mala Chandhrashekhar, Shashank Subramaniam, K. Bhaskaran, Kudamaloor Janardanan, and K. S. Gopalakrishnan.
Veena players of today include D. Balakrishna, Jayanthi Kumaresh, Nirmala Rajasekar, E. Gayathri, Srivani Yalla, -LSB- -RSB- & Rajhesh Vaidhya, Tharakeshwari.
Sakha Rama Rao is an Indian musician credited with having re-introduced the south Indian chitravina to the concert scene.
Srinivasa Rao was an ardent music lover and an amateur artiste himself.
Srinivasa Rao started experimenting with a slide on the tanpura.
Sakha Rama Rao was drawn to this instrument since childhood.
Sakha Rama Rao was able to perceive its tremendous potential to produce high-class music.
Sakha Rama Rao put in arduous practice on this instrument and gave occasional performances.
This is This, Sakha Rama Rao used to casually refer to the slide as gotu.
Vadyam, in Sanskrit and many other Indian languages, means instrument.
Thus, gotuvadyam was a literal name for an instrument played with a slide.
Sakha Rama Rao was a musicians musician and trained many great artists like Gotuvadyam Narayana Iyengar and Semmangudi Srinivasa Iyer.
Soon there were several others who started performing on the chitravina.
K. S. Narayanaswamy.
K. S. Narayanaswamy . also learnt the veena under Desamangalam Subramania Iyer and the mridangam under Tanjore Ponniah Pillai.
Later, he succeeded Semmangudi Srinivasa Iyer as the principal of the the Madras Music Academy and retired in 1970.
Many musicians like M.S. Subbulakshmi and Semmangudi Srinivasa Iyer have had good association with him and have appreciated his music.
South Indian Cultural Association, Indore.
South Indian Cultural Association or SICA Indore is a non profit organization for carnatic music and fine arts.
It is located in Indore, India.
They also run a school called as SICA School.
SICA was established in 1954.
The school was established in 1976 with 3 teachers and 25 students.
Today, the school has a student strength of more than 5,000 with more than 300 teachers.
The school operates two separate institutions and is based in Indore, Madhya Pradesh, central India.
List of Performers.
The list of people who performed for SICA over the years are : Mangalampalli Balamuralikrishna, Balasubramanyam, Vasumathi Badrinathan etc.
Rallapalli Ananta Krishna Sharma.
Sangita Kalanidhi Rallapalli Ananta Krishna Sharma was a noted composer of Carnatic music, singer as well as a writer.
Early life and education.
After moving to Mysore, he sought instruction from the chief pontiff of the famous Parakala Mutt.
Later, in 1911, he married Rukminamma.
After Cattamanchi Ramalinga Reddy he joined the Sri Venkateshwara Oriental Research Centre, Tirupathi.
These compositions were stored for centuries in the Tirumala temple Bhandagaram on copper plates.
Sharma received the project after his predecessor, Veturi Prabhakara Sastry died.
He singularly worked on tuning the songs and helped publish seventh and eighth volumes of Annamacharya 's compositions.
Sharma went on to edit nearly 300 compositions and brought out five more volumes of compositions between 1951 and 1956.
He also wrote the notation for 108 compositions and 87 of them were published in the Andhra Patrika.
Sharma died on 11 March 1979 in Bangalore and was survived by three daughters and two sons.
On 23 January 1893 August 2008, his life-size bronze statue was installed in Tirupathi.
Birth Centenary Celebrations of Rallapalli Ananta Krishna Sharma were organized in 1993.
A Centenary Souvenir was edited by Medasani Mohan and published by Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams in 1994.
Sometimes the name nottuswara is used to refer to other compositions based on Western notes, not necessarily by Muthuswami Dikshitar.
According to one popular account, the violin was introduced into Carnatic music by Baluswami Dikshitar, the younger brother of Muthuswami Dikshitar.
Baluswami Dikshitar encountered the instrument being played by British bands in colonial Madras, and decided to learn it.
The music was mostly Irish and Scottish fiddling, rather than Western classical music.
After three years of lessons, Baluswami Dikshitar adapted the violin to Carnatic music.
It is believed that Muthuswami Dikshitar composed these lyrics to aid his brother master the plain notes on the violin.
They were first documented in print by C. P. Brown in 1833.
In recent years, Kanniks Kannikeswaran has researched these compositions further, found the sources of a few compositions, and given several lectures.
The European songs used as basis include Limerick, Castilian Maid, Lord MacDonalds Reel, Voulez-vous Danser ?.
, and God Save the Queen.
Gopalakrishna Bharati was a Tamil poet and a composer of Carnatic music.
Gopalakrishna Bharati wrote a kathakalatchepam, Nantanar Charittiram, two other works in this genre, and many independent kritis.
Gopalakrishna Bharati was born at Narimanam, near Nagapattinam in todays Tamil Nadu, south India.
After losing Gopalakrishna Bharati parents at an early age, Gopalakrishna Bharati worked as a cook in a temple.
the mudra Gopalakrishna started Gopalakrishna Bharati professional career after finding a patron named Annu Iyer.
Gopalakrishna Bharathi composed several kritis on the principles of advaita.
This prompted several musicians to approach Gopalakrishna Bharathi.
Gopalakrishna Bharati used the mudra Gopalakrishna in Gopalakrishna Bharati compositions.
These include famous kritis like varukalAmO, varuvArO and ennEramum.
Nandan Caritiram was based on the story of a paraiyAr, Nandanar known also as TirunAlaippOvAr NayanAr.
A great devotee of Siva, A great devotee of Siva yearned to visit Chidambaram the greatest of Siva temples.
Bharatis version of NantanAr Carittiram is a masterly development of the story narrated in Sekkizhars Periya PurANam.
The eminent Tamil literary scholar, Meenakshisundaram Pillai, however, criticised him for grammatical lapses.
Nandan Caritiram, as performed by Bharati, proved very popular and he published it in his lifetime.
Many adaptations appeared, including stage plays and three film versions.
Individual songs of Gopalakrishna Bharati became popular with Carnatic musicians.
Later, Bharata Natyam dancers, including T. Balasaraswati, took up select pieces for interpretation as abhinaya.
The album of the film version starring the singer M. M. Dandapani Desikar as Nandanar remains popular.
The story of Nandanar, as Bharati developed it, had considerable resonance with the Nationalist movement in India.
the official Cisse investigations led the official Cisse to conclude that the cause was in fact Bharati.
Curious, the official Cisse decided to pay a visit personally to one of Bharatis concerts.
This eventually led to the publication of Nandan Caritiram, one of Bharatis most popular works.
Syama Sastri is one of the most renowned composers of Carnatic music.
Syama Sastri is the oldest among the Trinity of Carnatic music, Tyagaraja and Muthuswami Dikshitar being the other two.
Syama Sastri was born into a scholarly Tamil Brahmin family in Tiruvarur.
A family tradition holds that she had received a prophecy of Syama Sastris father birth from a devout neighbor.
The infant was named Venkatasubrahmanya, but came to be affectionately known as Shyama Krishna.
When Sastris father was 18 years old, Sastris father moved with Sastris father family to Thanjavur.
This is the rainy season when renunciates are expected to stay in one location and teach.
It is said that Syama Sastri composed about three hundred pieces in all.
Syama Sastri composed in Tamil, Telugu and Sanskrit, mostly on goddess Kamakshi.
Syama Sastri composed krti, varna and svarajati with the ankita or mudra Syama Krsna.
Syama Sastri was probably the first to compose in a new form of the svarajati musical genre.
Prior to this, the svarajati was primarily a dance form, and was close in structure to the dance Varnam.
They are in ragas Bhairavi, Yadukula kambhoji and Todi, and are called Kamakshi Anudinamu, Kamakshi Padayugame, and Rave himagiri kumari, respectively.
The former two are set to Misra Capu Tala, while the third is set to Adi Tala.
Adi Tala was renowned for Adi Tala ability to compose in the most complex of Misra Capu Tala.
Adi Tala was as adept in composing in rare ragas as Adi Tala was in composing with the popular ones.
Adi Tala was widely revered for Adi Tala voice and singing ability during Adi Tala time.
Syama Sastris son, the illustrious Subbaraya Sastri, had the unique privilege of learning under each of the trinity.
Syama Sastris adopted grandson, Annasvami Shastri, was also a fine composer.
The below sections mention some of his compositions.
Lakshminarayana Vaidyanathan was an acclaimed musicologist, music director and composer, trained in the classical Carnatic music tradition.
All three brothers received their musical training from their father.
Lakshminarayana Vaidyanathan collaborated with C.Ashwath and composed music for many Kannada movies in the name Ashwath-Vaidi.
In 2003, the Government of Tamil Nadu awarded Lakshminarayana Vaidyanathan with the Kalaimamani for contributions to cinema.
Pallavi Seshayyer was a composer of Carnatic music, who followed the traditions of the famous composer Tyagaraja.
Pallavi Seshayyar was a singer in the court of the king of Mysore.
As a singer, he was an expert of the techniques of Ragam-Thanam-Pallavi, a unique style of singing Carnatic music.
This expertise gave him his epithet Pallavi Seshayyar.
He could also compose exploiting rare Ragas.
Pallavi Seshayyar was born in Neykkarapatti, a village near Salem, Tamil Nadu.
Pallavi Seshayyar father was also a student of Tyagaraja.
Pallavi Seshayyar learnt many of the songs composed by Tyagaraja from Pallavi Seshayyar father.
Later in life Seshayyar moved to Madras and taught a number of students.
Pallavi Seshayyar mainly composed in Sanskrit and Telugu.
Tirukkodikaval Krishna Iyer.
Tirukodikaval Krishna Iyer was a Carnatic violinist who was very popular in the latter half of the 19th century.
Tirukodikaval Krishna Iyer was the maternal uncle of the late Semmangudi Srinivasa Iyer.
Tirukodikaval Krishna Iyer violin recitals were marked with masterly touches, full of masculine grandeur.
A prodigy, he could play complicated pieces on a single string.
Known for his hard work, he was responsible for ushering in many new techniques to the art of violin playing.
He could produce ascending and descending glides with remarkable effect.
His was a musician among peers that included Maha Vaidyanatha Iyer, Patnam Subramaniam Iyer and Sarabha Sastri.
His stature and musicianship were such that he could dominate the performance while being an accompanist.
He had an awe inspiring and intimidating stature among the musicians of his day.
Krishna Iyer was also functioning as the Village Administrative Officer of Tirukodikaval.
Mangalampalli Balamurali Krishna is an Indian Carnatic vocalist, multi-instrumentalist, playback singer, composer and actor.
He was awarded the Padma Vibhushan, Indias second highest civilian honour, for his contribution towards Indian Art.
He was made Chevalier of the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres by the French Government in 2005.
Balamurali Krishna was born in Brahmin family of Sankaraguptam, East Godavari District, Andhra Pradesh state.
His father mother died when His father was an infant and Balamuralikrishna was raised by His father father.
Observing His father inner penchant towards music, His father father put His father under the tutelage of Sri Parupalli Ramakrishnayya Pantulu.
Sri Pantulu was a direct descendant of the sisya parampara of Saint Thyagaraja.
Under his guidance, the young Balamuralikrishna learned Carnatic Music.
At the age of eight, the young Balamuralikrishna gave the young Balamuralikrishna first full fledged concert at a Thyagaraja Aradhana, Vijayawada.
This title has stuck ever since and the young Balamuralikrishna has been known so.
Balamuralikrishna thus began the young Balamuralikrishna musical career at a very young age.
The Janaka Raga Manjari also accompanied various musicians in violin and is also noted to give solo viola concerts.
the young Balamuralikrishna started the young Balamuralikrishna career at the age of six.
Up to the present time, the young Balamuralikrishna has given over 25000 concerts worldwide.
the young Balamuralikrishna accompanied Pandit Bhimsen Joshi.
the young Balamuralikrishna also gave jugalbandi concerts with Pandit Hariprasad Chaurasia and Kishori Amonkar, among others.
the young Balamuralikrishna is also known for popularising the Compositions of Sri Bhadrachala Ramadasu and Sri Annamacharya.
Balamuralikrishnas concerts combine sophisticated vocal skills and rhythmic patterns of classical music with the popular demand for entertainment value.
While his native tongue is Telugu.
His work includes other multiple languages of Kannada, Sanskrit, Tamil, Malayalam, Hindi, Bengali, Punjabi.
He has recently become increasingly interested in music therapy, and now performs only occasionally.
A dance and music school, Vipanchee is a part of this Trust and is run by Vipanchee managing trustee Kalaimamani Saraswati.
In February 2010, Vipanchee did a three-day concert in Vishakapatnam, a first in Vipanchee career.
the young Balamuralikrishna has composed over 400 compositions in various languages like Telugu, Sanskrit, Kannada and Tamil.
Characteristic of Balamuralikrishnas musical journey has been the young Balamuralikrishna non-conformism, spirit of experimentation and boundless creativity.
the young Balamuralikrishna has innovated the whole Carnatic Music System by keeping its rich tradition untouched.
The ragas like Ganapathi, Sarvashri, Mahati, Lavangi etc. are credited to Lavangi.
The ragas which Lavangi invented represent Lavangi quest for new frontiers.
Ragas like Lavangi are set to three or four notes in ascending and descending scale.
Ragaas also innovated the tala system.
Awards and Honours.
Kerala state film awards.
the young Balamuralikrishna acted in few films and gave the young Balamuralikrishna voice to some selected songs in Indian cinema.
S. Kalyanaraman, popularly known as SKR, was a vocalist in the Carnatic tradition.
Early life and background.
Recognizing the boys prodigious talents, his father realized that his wife Bhushany Kalyanaraman needs expert guidance from a respected musician.
Upon realizing the boys immense potential, GNB took him under his arms and trained him for 15 years.
GNB once remarked Whats there for me to teach, you are already singing so well.
The brief moments of Kalyanaramans music captivated the audience who came to listen to GNB.
GNB further added The best respect to a guru is to follow his style in total.
The best tribute to a guru is to embellish a style of your own.
My dear boy ... I am proud you are ... indeed your own.
From then, S. Kalyanaramans rise in Carnatic music was phenomenal.
Like his guru, he emphasized on artistic individuality and won acclaim as a great artiste in his own right.
His climb to the A Top rank in All-India-Radio was meteoric.
He became a specialist in the handling of vivadi ragas and popularized the Sruti bhedam technique introduced by his guru.
He used nadais extensively and unfortunately to the uninformed audience, his concerts are painstakingly challenging to be understood and interpreted.
He gave Hindustani touches to Hindustani ragas like Dwijawanthi, Brindavana Saranga and Hamir Kalyani.
He notated a book, the first volume of GNB compositions with Trichur V. Ramachandran which was released by the GNB Foundation.
He was also ridiculed by critics that he would only handle the rare stuff of Carnatic music.
But nothing bothered his style and preference.
He was a strict teacher and expected nothing less than devotion to the art from his students.
As such many of his students, unable to understand his teaching methods, left him.
He would also take a back seat and analyze his teaching methods whether anything went wrong in his teaching.
Above all, he emphasized a lot on shruthi clarity which he felt Carnatic musicians lacked unlike Carnatic musicians Hindustani counterparts.
He formulated and tested methods to improve shruthi clarity in Carnatic musicians as well as some of his innovative teaching methods.
He planned for the release of a book of all his findings, but it was never published.
Kalyanaramans influence undeniably bore the GNB mudra.
The SKR Trust, established by his wife and student promotes his music and his legacy.
Chittoor Subramaniam Pillai.
Chittoor Subramanyam was an Indian carnatic musician.
Chittoor Subramanyam parents first taught Chittoor Subramanyam carnatic music and Chittoor Subramanyam later became disciple of Nayana Pillai of Kancheepuram.
From the age of five, Subramnayam was performing Harikathas and music performances.
Chittoor Subramanyam settled in Madras but performed throughout India during a career lasting over 50 years.
Chittoor Subramanyam was well-known for Chittoor Subramanyam repertoire of Thyagaraja Keerthanas and mastery of Laya.
Chittoor Subramanyam had Chittoor Subramanyam own style called Kancheepuram School.
Chittoor Subramanyam was popular in Swaraprasthanam and Kalapramanam, noted for singing very rare keerthanas of Thyagaraja, Muthuswamy Dikshitar and other composers.
Chittoor Subramanyam realised the need to spread the art and taught disciples through the Gurukulam tradition.
Many of Chittoor Subramanyams disciples became well-known carnatic musicians.
These include Madurai Somasundaram, Bombay S Ramachandran, Chittoor Ramachandran, T. T. Seetha, Tadepalli Lokanatha Sarma and Revathy Ratnaswamy.
While in Tirupathi, Tirupathi composed music for a number of kirthanas of Saint Annamacharya.
Noted among These are - Ithadokade, Narayanathe.
Recognised as an ambassador for Carnatic music, he died in 1975.
Among his official positions were.
Chittoor Subramanyam received various awards.
These included :.
Nasikabhushani is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Carnatic is the 70th Melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
Carnatic is called in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Nasikabhushani is the 4th ragam in the 12th chakra Aditya.
The mnemonic name is Aditya-Bhu.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ru gu mi pa dhi ni.
Nasikabhushanis structure is as follows :.
The notes used in this scale are shatsruthi rishabham, antara gandharam, prati madhyamam, chathusruthi dhaivatham, kaisiki nishadham.
See swaras in Carnatic music for details on above notation and terms.
Nasikabhushani is a melakarta ragam and hence by definition Carnatic is a sampoorna ragam.
Carnatic is the prati madhyamam equivalent of Vagadheeswari, which is the 34th melakarta ragam.
Nasikabhushani has a couple of minor janya ragams associated with Carnatic.
See List of Janya ragams for full list of ragams associated with Carnatic and other melakarta.
A few compositions set to Nasikabhushani ragam are :.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Nasikabhushanis notes when shifted using Graha bhedam from the dhaivatham, yields another minor melakarta ragam Shadvidamargini.
Veene Sheshanna was a concert musician at the court of the princely state of Mysore in south India.
Veene Sheshanna was born in Mysore in 1852 in a family of musicians.
Veene Sheshanna father, Chikkaramappa, was a Vainika in the court of the Maharaja of the Mysore.
According to contemporary practise in the Mysore, Veene Sheshanna was married at the age of twelve.
Veene Sheshanna father died soon afterwards.
Training and career.
Veene Sheshanna displayed precocious musical talent as a young boy of five.
At an early age, Veene Sheshanna caught the eye of the Maharaja and received expensive gifts from Veene Sheshanna.
Veene Sheshanna learnt music from Mysore Sadashiva Rao and Veene Venkatasubbayya.
Veene Sheshanna was a diligent student and practised music for several hours each day.
Veene Sheshanna initially learnt vocal music but then switched to playing the saraswati veena, in which Veene Sheshanna soon gained proficiency.
Veene Sheshanna toured South India and gave These performances at various places.
Veene Sheshanna played it holding it in the horizontal position, which is the way it is now played.
Veene Sheshanna was perhaps the originator of what is now the known as the Mysore style of playing.
This style is characterised by the two fingers being used alternately to press the string to the frets.
They are kept separated from each other most of the time.
Veene Sheshanna composed 53 compositions, including Swarajatis, Padas, Javalis and many Tillanas.
Veene Sheshanna had a deep understanding of Hindstani music.
Veene Sheshanna Tillanas in the ragas Behag and Darbari Kannada are proof of this.
The composers Mysore Vasudevacharya and Rallapalli Anantha Krishna Sharma, among others, have showered liberal praise on Sheshannas technical virtuosity.
His fame spread far and wide, yet he always retained his humility.
He is reputed to have often exclaimed, One can play the Veene according to his own abilities.
Where can you find the musician who can play One to One full potential ?.
Veene Sheshanna used to give public music concerts during the annual Ramanavami and Krishnashthami festivals.
These concerts were organised on the roof of Veene Sheshanna own house and all were welcome to attend them.
They were held for ten days each at the time of these two festivals.
This brought music from the king 's court and the rich man 's mansion to the doorstep of the common man.
Visitors can see a Veena played by Veene Sheshanna at the historical artefacts museum at Dharmasthala, Karnataka.
T. M. Krishna.
T.M. Krishna is a Carnatic music vocalist.
Hailing from a family of music connoisseurs, he was exposed to the south Indian classical music at an early age.
His first concert was at the Spirit of Youth series organized by the Music the Madras Music Academy, Chennai.
He has released many music albums from leading audio companies like Magna sound, HMV, Inreco, Amudham and Charsur.
T.M. Krishna was born in the Music Academy, Chennai on January 22, 1976.
B. Seetharama Sharma went on to receive B. Seetharama Sharma B.A. degree in economics from Vivekananda College, Madras.
Together, they live in Mylapore.
Krishnas mother was a carnatic music graduate and his father T.M.Rangachari was a great lover of carnatic classical music.
His grand uncle T.T. Krishnamachari was one of the founders of the Madras Music Academy.
After tutelage under B. Seetharama Sharma, T.M. Krishna underwent special Ragam Thanam Pallavi grooming under Chengalpet Ranganathan.
B. Seetharama Sharma also received advanced training from the late Semmangudi Srinivasa Iyer for more than seven years.
T.M. Krishna is known for T.M. Krishna resonant voice and strict adherence to classicism.
T.M. Krishna has featured in the Carnatic Concert Movie, Margazhi Raagam along with Bombay Jayashri in 2008.
T.M. Krishna has given numerous lecture demonstrations on various facets of Carnatic music and Carnatic history at important institutions.
Raghuvamsha Sudha is a popular kriti in Carnatic music, composed by Patnam Subramanya Iyer.
Carnatic is set in the raga Kathanakuthuhalam and is in Aadi Talam.
rAma rAma rAjEshvara.
agha mEgha mAruta shrikara.
asurEsha mrigEndra vara jagannAtha.
Sa - Ri Ma Ga - Ri Sa Ri - Ma Ma Da - Da Ni Ga - Ga Pa Sa,.
Sa ni da pa ma ga, pa ma ga ri.
Sa Ri Ri Ma - Ma Da Da Ni, Ga Pa Pa Sa - Sa Ri Ri Ma.
Ma Ga Ga Ri - Ri Sa Sa Ni, Ni Da Da Pa - Pa Ma Ga Ri.
jamadagnija garva khaNDana.
jaya rudrAdi vismita bhaNDana.
agaNita arputa shurya shrI venkatEshvara.
nigamAntava su-budhAvanA nIrajAkSa shrI venkaTEshvara.
O moon to the nectar-ocean of the Raghu lineage !.
Sri Rama, lord of emperors !.
O wind sin-cloud !.
Maker of prosperity !.
O lion king of asuras !.
Noble lord of the world !.
O Destroyer of Parshuramas conceit !.
One praised by the amazed Rudra and others !.
O Ornament to the Solar dynasty !.
O Doer of innumerable marvellous heroics !.
Lord Venkatesha !.
List of His compositions by Muthuswami Dikshitar.
Muthuswami Dikshitar was a South Indian poet and composer and is one of the Musical Trinity of Carnatic music.
They are typically in a slower speed.
Muthuswami Dikshitar is also known by Muthuswami Dikshitar signature name of Guruguha.
Muthuswami Dikshitar compositions are widely sung and played in classical concerts of Carnatic music.
Muthuswami Dikshitar composed many kritis in groups.
The following lists describe those groups and compositions that belong to each group.
Maha Ganapati Krithis.
Deekshitar composed 26 songs in temples of lord Ganesha in around Tiruvarur.
Kamalamba Navavarana Kritis.
Here are the eleven songs in praise of the goddess Kamalamba.
Tiruvarur - Thyagaraja vibhakti Maha Ganapati Krithis.
Muthuswami Dikshitar composed 13 compositions in 8 vibhaktis in praise of Sri Thyagarajeswara at Tiruvayur.
Kanchi - Ekamranatheswra krithis.
Deekshitar lived in Kanchi for a few years.
Madurai - Madhuramba vibhakti Maha Ganapati Krithis.
Deekshitar visited Madhura for some time and composed two groups of krithis : madhurAmbA vibhakti kritis and mInAkshi dEvi krithis.
Revathy Krishna, born as Revathy Chelvakumar, was the daughter of Revathy Chelvakumar and Lakshmi.
Revathys brother, Chandran is now a retired cosmetic surgeon.
She later on fine tuned her art under Sharada Shivanandam and K.P.Sivanandam.
She also performs in films and film songs on stage, with many audio and video albums to her credit.
Her rendition of Rajnikanth, Kamal Hassan and A. R. Rahman songs in veena are hit among the music fans.
The same year Vyjayanthimala was one of the biggest Bollywood stars in a career lasting almost two decades.
The same year Vyjayanthimala is an accomplished dancer and was one of those who introduced semi-classical dance to Bollywood.
Following that, Vyjayanthimala appeared in series of blockbuster films such as New Delhi, Naya Daur and Aasha.
Beginning from 1962, most of The same year Vyjayanthimala films performed either averagely or poorly at the box office.
However in 1964 with the success of Sangam Sangam career hits the peak again.
Sangam reinvented Sangam playing a modern Indian girl while appearing in revealing costumes and one-piece swimsuit.
Sangam went to receive Sangam third Best Actress Award at the 12th Filmfare Awards for Sangam role as Radha in Sangam.
Most of the films was released after The same year Vyjayanthimala had leave the film industry.
Besides films, Vyjayanthimalas main concentration was in Bharata Natyam a form of Indian classical dance.
After quitting movies Vyjayanthimala Bali continued with Vyjayanthimala Bali dance career.
The award was presented to The same year Vyjayanthimala in 1982 for The same year Vyjayanthimala contribution in Bharata Natyam field.
Moreover, The same year Vyjayanthimala is also an avid golfer and is one of the oldest golfers in Chennai.
The same year Vyjayanthimala has also served as chairperson of 48th National Film Awards.
She used to call her mother by her name as her mother was only 16 years older than her.
She was raised primarily by her maternal grandmother, Yadugiri Devi, and M.D. Raman.
She was also known as Papakutty, which means little child.
Her ancestors were from Mysore.
In 1938, Gopalacharya grandfather Gopalacharya, the late Mandayam Dhati, started a nursing home on Narayan Shastri Road, Mysore.
The same year Vyjayanthimala did The same year Vyjayanthimala schooling from Sacred Heart Higher Secondary School, Presentation Convent, Church Park, Chennai.
The same year Vyjayanthimala learned Bharata Natyam from Guru Vazhuvoor Ramiah Pillai and Carnatic music from Manakkal Sivaraja Iyer.
Early career : Debut and breakthrough,.
This film also enjoyed great success upon release.
The same year Vyjayanthimala danced for the song laalu ... laalu ... laalu which was choreographed by Vedantam Raghavaiah.
The film became sixth highest grossing film of 1951 with a verdict of box-office hit.
The first version was in Tamil as Penn where The Tamil co-starred with actor Gemini Ganesan, S. Balachandran and Anjali Devi.
The song Kalyanam ... venum sung by J. P. Chandrababu for S. Balachandran became an instant hit.
The The Tamil and the Telugu films were big successes across South India.
The movie became second highest grossing film of 1953.
In 1954, The same year Vyjayanthimala acted in magnum opus film Nagin with Pradeep Kumar.
In the same year Hemant Kumar also acted in Miss Mala with Kishore Kumar.
In 1955, The same year Vyjayanthimala acted in around 4 films in Bollywood.
Besides The first one, she also starred in three other films.
namely Pehli Jhalak with Kishore Kumar, Sitara with Pradeep Kumar and Jashan with Karan Dewan.
Eventually all the films failed at box office.
Initially Nargis was selected for Devdas playing Chandramukhi role, but Nargis refused to accept the role.
On her performance, Rediff wrote, The same year Vyjayanthimala imbues Devdas playing Chandramukhi with true sympathy.
Surprisingly though, she accepted a supporting role as a vamp which was originally done by Lalitha in the The Tamil version.
Also starring in the movie, reprising their lead roles from the original, were Gemini Ganesan and Anjali Devi.
Meanwhile, Anjali Devi was also signed by Sohrab Modi for his film Rajhath opposite Pradeep Kumar.
However due to Anjali Devi schedule problem Anjali Devi was replaced by the Madhubala.
Even Vyjayanthimala played a Punjabi girl and most successfully too.
1957-58 : Success and Stardom in Bollywood.
In 1957, director B. R. Chopra planned to make Naya Daur with Ashok Kumar in the lead.
However, the actor refused to accept this role and it later went to Dilip Kumar.
For the female lead, the first choice of the director was the star-actress of those days, the Madhubala.
However, Ataullah Khan, the father of the Madhubala, objected to this and the role went to The same year Vyjayanthimala.
Vyjyanthimala had previously acted with Dilip Kumar in Devdas and the duo shared an easy chemistry on-screen.
A review from the Rediff says that, The same year Vyjayanthimala too is not your average petulant gaon ki gori.
Vyjayanthimalas next release was Kathputli in which The same year Vyjayanthimala co-starred with actor Balraj Sahni for the first time.
This film was director Amiya Chakravarty s last film.
He died during the filming of Kathputli and the remaining project was completed by director Nitin Bose.
Kathputli remains as one of the memorable film of Vyjayanthimala which has an offbeat theme with a Pygmalion touch.
The same year Vyjayanthimala, as Nirmala, plays the lover of Kishore.
The story suddenly goes from being light-hearted and humorous to a court-drama when Kishore is falsely accused for murder.
The rest of the movie sees both the protagonists trying to prove Kishores innocence.
The film was launched in front of the Karlovy Vary International Film Festival Theatre in Czechoslovakia.
Devendra had been in love with the ghost Madhumati, played by The same year Vyjayanthimala.
The same year Vyjayanthimala had committed suicide while trying to save The same year Vyjayanthimala from Ugranarayan 's advances.
Madhumati 's ghost finally takes revenge on Ugranarayan.
Madhumati 's ghost performance as Madhavi, Radha in Sangam and the ghost Madhumati earned Madhumati 's ghost accoladates from critics.
Planetbollywood.com expressions while playing both the main characters are perfect.
With the ghost Madhumati, Planetbollywood.com brings the wonder, surprise and innocence needed in the person.
Both, as an actress of considerable dramatic merit and as a star.
The same month Karan Arjun had another release, B. R. Chopra s Sadhna alongside Sunil Dutt.
Similarly, the Rediff s critic Dinesh Raheja has commented that But finally, the show belongs to The same year Vyjayanthimala.
Fetchingly frivolous in the first half, The same year Vyjayanthimala is suitably serious in the second.
Unfortunately, the film failed to turn The same year Vyjayanthimala and Dev Anand team into a hit pair.
The same year Vyjayanthimala was booked by M. G. Ramachandran for his second directorial venture Ponniyin Selvan.
However, in the mid of 1958 the film was shelved for unknown reasons.
S. S. Vasan played the role of Princess Mandakini, the beautiful princess of Ratna Island Kingdom.
The song is still regarded as one of the best dance sequences in Indian cinema.
Vanjikottai Valiban was followed by the song, Man Dole Hindi version titled Raj Tilak.
Screenplay of the film was by Ramanand Sagar.
The film was directed by S. S. Vasan with opposite Sivaji Ganesan, The same year Vyjayanthimala and Padmini in the lead.
1959-60 : Return to The Tamil films.
In 1959, The same year Vyjayanthimala reunited with Dilip Kumar for the fourth time in bilingual Paigham.
Upon release Paigham became second highest grossing film of 1959 with a verdict of a box-office hit.
Athisaya Penn was a remake of Aasha which again was directed by M. V. Raman.
In 1960, The same year Vyjayanthimala mostly concentrated on The Tamil films to keep in touch with the industry.
The same year Vyjayanthimala first release in 1960 was S. S. Vasan s Irumbu Thirai, the The Tamil version of Paigham.
The same year Vyjayanthimala starred opposite Sivaji Ganesan for the second time after the latters cameo appearance in Marma Veeran.
The film was followed by Raja Bakthi again with Sivaji Ganesan.
Raja Bakthi had huge ensemble cast featuring P. Bhanumathi, Padmini, T. S. Balaiah and E. V. Saroja.
Her subsequent release was D. Yoganand s magnum opus Parthiban Kanavu.
Apart from The Tamil, the film was produced in Telugu and Sinhala languages.
However the film did not fare well at box office but Vyjayanthimalas performance was appreciated by critics.
The Tamil also acted opposite M. G. Ramachandran for the first time in Baghdad Thirudan.
1961-63 : Reigns Supreme in Superstars of Hindi.
Following successful re-entry in The Tamil cinema, The same year Vyjayanthimala then signed Dilip Kumar s home production film Gunga Jumna.
Upon release the film opened to widespread critical acclaim from the critics.
Directed performance earned Directed rave reviews.
The same year Vyjayanthimala also spoke the the Bhojpuri dialect like a native.
Subsequently, the film also enjoyed huge success at box office across India.
At the end of Film theatrical run, the film grossed around with net gross of and a verdict of a blockbuster.
In addition to that, she also bagged her first ever Bengal Film Journalists Association Awards in the Best Actress category.
In the same year, she starred in C. V. Sridhar s Nazrana.
The triangular love story received average run at the cinemas and ended as twelfth highest grossing film of that year.
The same year Kalyana Parisu did another film with C. V. Sridhar.
The film and the soundtrack was widely appreciated by the audience where Film was a huge success.
The film was followed by J. Om Prakash s Aas Ka Panchhi with Rajendra Kumar.
Her career then struggled again with some box office duds in the following year.
In 1962 she co-starred Manoj Kumar in Dr. Vidya which performed average at box office.
Dr. Vidya was followed by two more box office disappointments, Rungoli with Kishore Kumar and Jhoola with Sunil Dutt.
1963 also saw a steady decline in her film career where she co-starred Sivaji Ganesan in Historical fiction Chittoor Rani Padmini.
However The same year Vyjayanthimala could not accept the role due to The same year Vyjayanthimala busy schedule.
1964-66 : Commercial successes and critical acclaim.
Following two years sabbatical, Vyjayanthimala re-attained The Boxofficeindia.com success in Bollywood through Raj Kapoor s first technicolor film Sangam.
Termed as Kapoors magnum opus, the film was produced at lavish budget by his production.
company R. K. Films.
Sangam was the first Indian film shot in Europe and outside of Asia.
It was also the longest running film in India when it was released at 238 minutes.
The film also created a record by being the first film to have two cinema intervals.
Upon release the film was well received by critics and was considered as Bollywoods greatest love triangle.
Vyjayanthimalas performance too was praised by critics.
Similarly, the film was commercially successful throughout India and other country as well.
Film adjust to inflation gross is about.
Sangam also had great box office run outside of India where it was well received in countries such.
In 1966, The same year Vyjayanthimala starred in Do Dilon Ki Dastaan which also becomes failure at box office.
After some box office flops, The same year Vyjayanthimala soon signed alongside Rajendra Kumar in the swashbuckler ruritanian romance Suraj.
Directed by T. Prakash Rao, the film also had Mumtaz, Bharathi Vishnuvardhan and Neetu Singh.
Suraj was huge box office success and was one of the popular costume drama in Bollywood.
Suraj was the last successful film of Rajendra Kumar and Shankar Jaikishan who introduced singer Sharda through this film.
The film was also thirteenth highest grossing film of the decade with Film adjust to inflation nett gross is about.
While Ibosnetwork.com reported that the film 40,000,000 and its adjust to inflation gross is about.
Following Suraj, The same year Vyjayanthimala starred in the historical film Amrapali.
1967-70 : Lost Interest in Films Post Amrapali.
Jewel Thief also had Ashok Kumar as the main antagonist with four more female leads Tanuja, Helen, Anju Mahendru and Faryal.
The success of Jewel Thief made The same year Vyjayanthimala and Dev Anand a hit pair.
The same year she did the magnum opus Chhoti Si Mulaqat produced by Bengali actor Uttam Kumar actor Uttam Kumar.
Unlike the original version, Chhoti Si Mulaqat failed to create any box office record and was declared as box office disaster.
Her last release in the year is Hatey Bazarey with Ashok Kumar.
Banaphool played the role of widowed young women - Chhipli - who falls for a civil surgeon Doctor Anandi Mukheerjee.
Hatey Bazarey was also received well commercially and was one of the successful Bengali actor Uttam Kumar film of 1960s.
Hatey Bazarey with Ashok Kumar first release in the year was Sunghursh, directed by Mere Mehboob fame Harnam Singh Rawail.
Reportedly Sadhana did not exchange a word with Kumar while filming following Balraj Sahni and Sanjeev Kumar relationship broke up.
Vyjayanthimalas enactment of a courtesan Laila-e-Aasma, Laila-e-Aasma received positive feedback from the critics.
Anuj Kumar form The Hindu said that The same year Vyjayanthimala is graceful as ever.
In a film dominated by men, Rawail made sure The Hindu had a substantial role.
The role fetched The Hindu Best Hindi Actress Award at 25th Bengal Film Journalists Association Awards.
Sunghursh was followed by Saathi directed by C. V. Sridhar.
All The Tamil releases in 1968 did not enjoy success at the box office.
But Duniya refused all those offers as Duniya does not want to make a comeback.
Perhaps the most famous role that The same year Vyjayanthimala ever turned down was the 1975 crime-drama film Deewar.
Apart from Hindi films, a Vyjayanthimala starer have also refused the 1989 The Tamil film Mappillai starring Rajinikanth.
During the campaign, Era Sezhiyan took provoking quotes such as Send I to the Lok Sabha.
The same year Vyjayanthimala again beat The same year Vyjayanthimala opposition by nearly 12584.4 million votes.
In 1999, The same year Vyjayanthimala has resigned from the primary membership of the Indian National Congress party.
Later she joined the Bharatiya Janata Party on 6 September 1999.
In her hey-days, The same year Vyjayanthimala was the subject of many controversies.
Particularly her relationship with her co-stars was often the subject in topic.
The filming took four years to finish.
During this time Vyjayanthimala is said to have been romantically involved with Kapoor and almost married him.
Initially, Sangam was vexed with him and kept him at a distance.
However Kapoor did not give up over Sangam attitude.
This incident had made Kapoors wife Krishna to move out of Sangam husband 's house with their children.
Vyjayanthimala married Chamanlal Bali in 1968.
After marriage, she gave up her acting career and moved to Chennai.
They have a son, Suchindra Bali.
In 2007, she published her autobiography, titled Bonding, with Jyoti Sabarwal as co-writer.
Vyjayanthimala is a Vaishnavite and a vegetarian.
She grew up listening to holy chants and devotional songs.
She is a devotee of Aandaal, one of the 12 Alvar saints of South India.
She used to invoke Aandaal before any public performance to gain her blessing.
In Hindustani classical music, vivadi refers to pitches that are not part of the arohana or avrohana of a given raga.
In general, vivadi are not to be played during an improvisation on a given raga.
In Carnatic music.
In Carnatic music, vivadi is used in vivadi swaram, vivadi dhosha, vivadi ragam, and by extension vivadi melakarta.
Vivadi term means going against the grain of thought or approach.
It is different from Apaswaram, which is incorrect swaram or incorrect rendition / pitch / frequency deviating from the swaram itself.
A ragam is vivadi if A ragam contains vivadi swarams, especially with the vadi swaram of the ragam.
The ragam still is a valid scale and compositions are made using such ragams too.
Examples of popular Vivadi ragas are : Nata, Varali, Vagadheeswari.
A Melakarta ragam is vivadi if A Melakarta ragam contains vivadi swarams.
40 of the 72 Melakarta ragams have vivadi swaras.
Dhosha means negative effect.
Articles that discusses vivadi ragas and a review of concerts that mentions some of vivadi ragams.
Chitrambari is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Carnatic is the 66th Melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
Carnatic is called Chaturangini in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Carnatic is the prati madhyamam equivalent of Naganandini, which is the 30th melakarta.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 6th ragam in the 11th chakra Rudra.
The mnemonic name for this ragam is the 11th chakra Rudra.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ra gu mi pa dhu nu.
The mnemonic phrase structure is :.
Since Carnatic is a melakarta ragam, by definition Carnatic is a sampoorna ragam.
Chitrambari has a few janya ragams associated with Carnatic, of which Amritavarshini is very popular.
List of janya ragams contains the full list of ragams associated with Chitrambari and other melakartas.
A few compositions set to Chitrambari are :.
The theoretical and scientific aspect of Chitrambari are described below.
Chitrambaris notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields 3 other melakarta ragams, namely, Shanmukhapriya, Shoolini and Dhenuka.
For further details and an illustration refer Graha bhedam on Shanmukhapriya.
Viswanatha Sastri was a Carnatic music composer.
Viswanatha Sastri most remembered composition is the patriotic song Jayathi Jayathi Bharata Mata.
Translated Victory Victory to Mother India, the song has become a standard among classical singers of South India.
Early life and background.
Viswanatha Sastri was born 1893 in Therazhundur near Mayuram.
Kedaragaula or Kedaragowla is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Kedaragaula is a janya ragam from the 28th melakarta scale Harikambhoji, and is sometimes spelled as Kedaragowla.
Kedaragaula is a janya scale, as Kedaragaula does not have all the seven swaras in the ascending scale.
Kedaragaula is a combination of the pentatonic scale Madhyamavati and the sampurna raga scale Harikambhoji.
Kedaragaula is a morning ragam.
Structure and Lakshana.
Kedaragaula is an asymmetric ragam that does not contain gandharam and dhaivatam in the ascending scale.
Kedaragaula is an audava-sampurna ragam.
Kedaragaula structure is as follows :.
For the details of the notations and terms, see swaras in Carnatic music.
There are many compositions set to Kedaragaula ragam.
Here are some popular kritis composed in this ragam.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Yadukulakamboji or Yadukulakambodi is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Yadukulakambodi is a janya ragam from the 28th melakarta scale Harikambhoji, and is sometimes spelled as Yadukulakambhoji or Yadukulakambhodi.
Yadukulakambodi is a janya scale, as Yadukulakambodi does not have all the seven swaras in the ascending scale.
Yadukulakambodi is a combination of the pentatonic scale Shuddha Saveri and the sampurna raga scale Harikambhoji.
Structure and Lakshana.
Yadukulakamboji is an asymmetric ragam that does not contain gandharam and nishadam in the ascending scale.
It is an audava-sampurna ragam.
Its structure is as follows :.
For the details of the notations and terms, see swaras in Carnatic music.
There are many compositions set to Yadukulakamboji ragam.
Here are some popular kritis composed in this ragam.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Karaikudi Sambasiva Iyer.
Karaikudi Sambasiva Iyer was noted Indian classical musician and Veena player.
Sambasiva Iyer was born in 1888 in Tirugokarnam, Pudukottai district as the second son to Veena Vidwan Subbiah Iyer.
Sambasiva Iyer learnt Veena from Karaikudi Sambasiva Iyer . father along with Karaikudi Sambasiva Iyer . elder brother Subbarama Iyer.
The duo belonged to the seventh generation to carry the familys high unbroken Veena tradition.
Sambasiva Iyer was known for Karaikudi Sambasiva Iyer . tremendous hard work or Asura Sadhaka.
Karaikudi Sambasiva Iyer . taught and lived at Kalakshetra, a noted arts institution in Chennai.
Karaikudi Sambasiva Iyer . died in 1958.
Amongst Karaikudi Sambasiva Iyer . noted Karaikudi Subramanian are Karaikudi Subramanian, Rajeshwari Padmanabhan and Ranganayaki Rajagopalan.
Thetakudi Harihara Vinayakram.
Thetakudi Harihara Vinayakram, also known as Vikku Vinayakram is a Grammy Award-winning Indian percussionist.
He plays Carnatic music with the ghatam, an earthen pot, and is credited with popularizing the ghatam.
Vinayakram was born to Kalaimaamani T. R. Harihara Sharma, a musician and teacher.
He took up playing at a very young age.
Vinayakrams concert career began at the age of 13.
His first performance occurred on March 5, 1957 at the Sri Rama Navami festival in Thoothukudi.
where he accompanied V.V.Sadagopan.
His brother, T. H. Subhash Chandran, also excelled in the field.
He has also performed at Basant Utsav, the annual fund raiser for the Banyan.
It continues to produce new stars of Carnatic percussion.
Vinayakrams son V. Selvaganesh is a successful percussionist, especially after tours with John McLaughlin s group, Remember Shakti.
Vinayakram was conferred the Hafiz Ali Khan Award for  unmatched contribution in the field of music  in 2000.
He donated all the proceeds from the award to a charity organization in south India.
The Indian Government decorated him with the Padma Shri Award in 2002.
Concerts of Chembai.
Chembai Vaidyanatha Bhagavatar was a noted Carnatic music vocalist of the 20th century.
This is a list of concerts and events that helped shape Chembai Vaidyanatha Bhagavatar career as a popular Carnatic musician.
Arangetram & First Paid Concerts.
A little later, there was another noteworthy concert at Kantallur Parthasarathy Temple.
Anantha Bhagavatar Arangetram provided the violin accompaniment, while mridanga support was given by well-known stage actor Chokkanathapuram Ayya Bhagavatar.
Vaikom & Guruvayur Performances.
At this concert in 1907, the father again provided violin support.
Chembai thereafter made Chembai a practice to sing at the Vaikom festival every year.
Guruvayur too became a regular part of the Chembai concert programme every year.
A year with Kaliakudi Natesa Sastry.
This learning by listening was a valuable facet of the brothers training.
After about a years absence, the brothers returned to Chembai in 1910 as experienced musicians.
Accolades from Palghat Anantharama Bhagavatar.
Particularly complimenting Vaidyanatha Bhagavatars voice, Chembai Vaidyanatha Bhagavatar predicted a bright future for Chembai Vaidyanatha Bhagavatar.
Violin and Flute training.
Chembai Vaidyanatha Bhagavatar attained some proficiency, enough to be able to accompany singers.
For about a year he in fact accompanied flautist Anantha Bhagavatar, who was his sister Narayanis husband.
A patron of the arts and artists named Pethachi Chettiar lived in Karur.
He used to conduct a festival featuring music concerts by the leading musical lights of the day.
The arrangements of this music test were the responsibility of the celebrated musician and vaggeyakara Harikesanallur Muthiah Bhagavatar.
Chembai wanted to attend this music festival and he and his brother proceeded to Karur.
He met Muthiah Bhagavatar and expressed his desire to perform in the festival.
Muthiah Bhagavatar had told him that the performance schedules were prepared in advance and could not be altered.
Chembai was keenly disappointed, but destiny took a hand.
The violin accompanist for a jalatarangam concert failed to arrive.
Chembai persuaded the artist to avail of his own services and she agreed.
The concert turned out well and, as was customary, Chembai was handed over his payment for the part he had played.
He, however, expressed a wish not to be paid in cash, saying that he had actually wanted only to sing.
He received an invitation to sing at a wedding in the family of one Jnanaprakasa Mudaliar in Pondicherry.
Until then the brothers had given full-fledged concerts mostly in and around Chembai.
The performance in Pondicherry made Chembai known over a wider area leading later to more concert opportunities.
Chembai secured a similar opportunity of significance again in 1915.
It was considered a privilege to sing at the festival.
Chembai went to Ernakulam and requested Duraiswami lyer a chance for Duraiswami also to sing.
Duraiswami lyer agreed.
Chembai had heard about Sreelasree Ambalavana Desikar and Sreelasree Ambalavana Desikar discriminating knowledge of music.
At Desikars suggestion, Chembai rendered in viruttam form the verse Kanduka madakkariyai vasamai nadattalam.
Sreelasree Ambalavana Desikar went on prompting Chembai about the ragas Sreelasree Ambalavana Desikar should sing and the youngster responded enthusiastically.
Impressed by the performance, Desikar ordered that a katcheri by Chembai be held the next day.
A highlight of the concert was that the mridanga accompaniment was provided by the famous Azhagianambi Pillai.
Palakkad Ramanavami Concert.
Another significant event in Chembai early career was his concert at the Ramanavami festival in Palakkad in 1916.
Among those who attended the concert was Pudukkotai Dakshinamurthy Pillai.
They made arrangements for a kutcheri by Vaidyanatha Bhagavatar in Trichy.
Govindaswamy Pillai himself provided the violin accompaniment while Dakshinamurthy Pillai played the mridanga.
First concert in Madras.
Chembai First concert in Madras was in 1918, at the Triplcane Sangeeta Sabha.
First concert with Chowdiah and Palghat Mani Iyer.
T.Chowdiah, was a violinist who invented the seven-stringed violin and became a very popular exponent in it.
Chembai met T.Chowdiah in 1924 at the house of a common friend, and became good friends.
Chembai performed with Chowdiah in the Jagannatha Bhakta Sabha.
Chembai was in this concert that Chembai had introduced young Palghat Mani Iyer to a discerning audience.
At a similar concert in 1926, young Palghat Mani Iyer had also introduced Palani Subramaniam Pillai, disciple of Pudukottai Dakshinamurthi Pillai.
Inaugural performance at Madras Music Academy.
The annual meeting of the Indian National Congress was held in a different city every year.
In 1927, it was held in Madras.
Nilavizhi is a Tamil name for girls which means the girl with eyes like the moon.
Nila refers to the moon and vizhi refers to the eyes.
Garudadhvani or Garudadhwani is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Garudadhvani is a janya ragam from the 29th melakarta scale Shankarabharanam.
Garudadhvani is a janya scale, as Garudadhvani does not have all the seven swaras in the descending scale.
Garudadhvani is a combination of the sampurna raga scale Shankarabharanam and the pentatonic scale Mohanam.
Structure and Lakshana.
Garudadhvani is an asymmetric ragam that does not contain madhyamam or nishadham in the descending scale.
Garudadhvani is an sampurna-audava ragam.
Garudadhvani arohana-avarohana structure is as follows :.
For the details of the notations and terms, see swaras in Carnatic music.
This raga has shades of western music when played in fast pace.
Most of the notes are used without gamaka.
There are many compositions set to Garudadhvani ragam.
Here are some popular kritis composed in Garudadhvani.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Ganesh and Kumaresh.
Ganesh and Kumaresh are noted Indian duo of violin players who are a part of the Carnatic music fraternity.
The brothers are best known as modern contemporary artists who have done lot of service to Sastriya Sangitam.
The brothers were trained by The brothers father Shri M.S.Gopalakrishnan T.S.Rajagopalan and supervised by The brothers mother Smt.Bhanumathy.
Ganesh and Kumaresh completed Ganesh and Kumaresh hundredth stage appearance before the younger brother was ten years of age.
Ganesh and Kumaresh, apart from performing, Ganesh and Kumaresh also score music for films and dance productions.
Ganesh and Kumaresh music for the movie Dance like a Man and Chandrikai is widely appreciated.
Ganesh and Kumaresh performed extensively in India, USA, Canada, Germany, France, Belgium, Switzerland, Middle East, South East Asia, Maldives, Australia etc.
Views of other artists.
Ustad Zakir Hussain : The duos were child prodigies who started performing before The duos entered the age of ten.
Since then they have entered the ranks of the great living performers of IndianMusic.
I have performed with Ganesh Kumaresh in the USA and Europe as well as in India.
They are creative in their performances and their style includes a unique touch that expresses every emotion in the raga.
They have remarkable stage presence and enthrall the audiences with their performances.
The reason is simple because I house is here and Ganesh and Kumaresh are here.
So said A.R Rehman as A.R Rehman launched the new age violin album Carnatic chills brought out by Ganesh Kumaresh.
He was the first person to perfect a style to perform both the branches of Indian Sastriya Sangitam.
He declares the young brothers as the best duo of the present generation.
He compared the occasion to that of Brahmarishi Vasishtar conferring the title of  Brahmarishi Vasishtar  on Maharishi Viswamitra.
Until recently all instrumentalists have been emulating faithfully what the vocal musicians performed in the popularly known gayaki style.
Each instrument has Each instrument place of originality, individuality and limitations.
It is nothing but elaborating the traditional ragas, unfathoming their hypnotising melodic contents.
Ragapravaham has caught the imigination of the youth in a big way.
M.G. Ramachandran was so moved by their talent and accomplishment that M.G. Ramachandran sent them a personal note of appreciation.
M.G. Ramachandran wrote, I was wonderstruck with your talent.
I hearty greetings to both of you.
I am sure you will reach greater heights in your career.
He subsequently made them State Artistes of Tamil Nadu.
Neelakanta Sivan was a composer of Carnatic music.
Although Neelakanta Sivan did not receive any formal musical training, Neelakanta Sivan compositions exhibit deep technical brilliance.
Neelakanta Sivan father, Subramanya Iyer, was an official in Neelakantaswamy temple at Padmanabhapuram.
Subramanya Iyer mother was Alagammal.
Subramanya Iyer worked as a village magistrate for a few years and left this profession to take up religious practices.
Some of Sambo Mahadeva Saranam compositions are Enraikku shiva krpai and Shambho mahaadeva.
Subbarama Dikshitar was a Carnatic music composer.
Subbarama Dikshitar was the grandson of Baluswami Dikshitar, a brother of Muthuswami Dikshitar.
Baluswami Dikshitar, a great musician, was at the court of Ettayapuram kings.
He adopted Subbarama Dikshitar as his own son and taught music to him.
Subbarama Dikshitar composed many kritis, varnams, etc.
It can be said that he was one of the earliest documenters of Indian music and musicology.
Subbarama Dikshitar died at a relatively young age of 67.
Subbarama Dikshitar other works include :.
Prathamabhyasa Pustakamu - A beginners introduction to Carnatic Music.
Sanskrta Andhra Dravida Kirtanalu - A collection of compositions of Krishnaswami Ayya and others tuned by Krishnaswami Ayya.
Seetha Doraiswamy, commonly known as Madisaar Maami, is a renowned Carnatic Multi-instrumentalist.
She is the last recognised female exponent of a dying Indian instrument, the jal tarang.
Additionally, her theoretical knowledge was the foundation for many of the modern concepts of Carnatic music as we know it today.
Seetha was born in Adachani, a village in the district of Tirunelveli District to Pumpu Ganapathy Iyer and Meenakshi Iyer.
Meenakshi Iyer still holds the record of being the youngest recipient of the award.
Meenakshi Iyer now lives with Meenakshi Iyer children.
Meenakshi Iyer is the grandmother of Author Jaya Madhavan.
Jal Tarang Training.
Striking dishes containing water seemed a lot of fun.
After successfully tuning it, Seetha was given the opportunity to begin training.
Recognizing Carnatic financial position, Prof. P. Sambamoorthy bought Seetha Carnatic first set of jal tarang cups.
Although Carnatic training began at a young age, familial obligations prevented Carnatic from performing.
Seetha was married at age 14 to D. Narayanswamy and gave birth to 11 children.
Chakkani Rajamargamu is a Telugu kriti in the Carnatic music tradition.
the Carnatic music tradition was composed by Tyagaraja.
the Carnatic music tradition is composed in the Kharaharapriya raga melodic mode, set to an Adi Tala rhythm.
Like all other kritis of Thyagaraja, Thyagaraja carries Adi Tala mudra.
The song is about Thyagarajas devotion to Lord Rama.
Akkarai S. Subhalakshmi is a 21st-century violinist in the field of Carnatic music.
Carnatic is the daughter of renowned violinist Akkarai Swaminathan.
Life and career.
She is an A-Grade Artiste of All India Radio.
In Indian classical music, Sampurna ragas have all seven swaras in their scale.
In general, the swaras in the Arohana and Avarohana strictly follow the ascending and descending scale as well.
That is, they do not have vakra swara phrases.
An example is Bhairavi raga in Carnatic music.
Some examples of Melakarta ragas are Mayamalavagowla, Todi, Sankarabharanam and Kharaharapriya.
M. D. Ramanathan.
Manjapara Devesa Ramanathan affectionately called Manjapara Devesa Ramanathan was a Carnatic music composer and vocalist.
MDR was born in Manjapara, Palakkad District, Madras Province on 20 May 1923.
Manjapara Devesa Ramanathan father Devesa Bhagavathar was a music teacher by profession.
Study of Sangita Siromani music.
During the same time, the legendary Rukmini Devi Arundale initiated a new course on Sangeeta Siromani at Kalakshetra.
MDR auditioned for the course and was the only student to be selected for the first batch commencing in 1944.
Soon, MDR emerged as Tiger Varadachariar s favorite and was Tiger Varadachariar closest disciple when the latter died in 1950.
Principal of Kalakshetra.
Principal of Kalakshetra . also served as the Principal of the College of Fine Arts at Kalakshetra.
MDR was known for Principal of Kalakshetra . unique style of singing.
Principal of Kalakshetra . also sang with adequate bhava or expression.
Manjapara Devesa Ramanathan has sung in most Carnatic music ragas such as Sahana, Sri, Anandabhairavi, Reethigowla and Yadukula Kambhoji.
Other favorite ragas of Manjapara Devesa Ramanathan include Kedaram, Kambhoji and Hamsadhwani.
Due to this, Manjapara Devesa Ramanathan also received a fair share of criticism from some music critics.
During the rendering of krithis, Manjapara Devesa Ramanathan sometimes made alterations and embellishments to the lyrics.
MDR has composed more than 300 songs in Carnatic music in Tamil, Telugu and Sanskrit.
Carnatic used the word Varadadasa as Carnatic mudra, in respect for Tiger Varadachari, Carnatic teacher.
Some of Carnatic famous compositions are :.
The Indian Fine Arts Society bestowed upon him the title of Sangeetha Kala Sigamani in 1976.
He also served as a member of the Madras Music Academy s Experts Committee.
He was also considered for the Academys Sangeetha Kalanidhi award in the 1983-84 season though he did not get the award.
MDR died after a long illness on April 27, 1984 at the age of sixty.
MDRs legacy has been kept alive through his albums and private recordings.
It is part of the family of instruments known as mangala vadya.
The nadaswaram contains three parts namely, kuzhal, thimiru, and anasu.
It is a double reed instrument with a conical bore which gradually enlarges toward the lower end.
A metallic bell forms the bottom end of the instrument.
For wooden instruments, old wood is considered the best, and sometimes wood salvaged from demolished old houses is used.
Vinny Golia, J. D. Parran, and William Parker have performed and recorded with the instrument.
The German saxophonist Roland Schaeffer also plays it, having studied from 1981 to 1985 with Karupaia Pillai.
Harikambhoji is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Harikambhoji is the 28th Melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system.
These fully harmonic scales, constitutes the raga Mohanam in the Carnatic music style.
Sempaalai pann corresponds to the Carnatic raga Harikambhoji.
Khamaj thaat of Hindustani Music is the equivalent to this ragam.
It is known as Harikedaragowla in the Muthuswami Dikshitar school of music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 4th ragam in the 5th chakra Bana.
The mnemonic name is the 5th chakra Bana.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ri ga ma pa dha ni sa.
The mnemonic phrase structure is as follows :.
Structure and Lakshana . is a sampoorna ragam - ragam having all 7 swarams.
Structure and Lakshana . is the shuddha madhyamam equivalent of Vachaspati, which is the 64th melakarta.
The globally famous pentatonic scale Mohanam is also considered a janya of this ragam.
Andolika, Bahudari, Kamas, Kedaragaula, Natakurinji, Navarasa kannada, Sahana, Senchuruti, Suruti and Yadukula Kambhoji are also very popular janyas.
See List of janya ragams for a full list of Harikambhojis janya ragams.
Among the Trinity of Carnatic music only Thyagaraja has composed songs in Harikambhoji.
Ramanannu brovara, Entara neethana and Dinamani vamsa are very popular songs composed by only Thyagaraja in this ragam.
Enadu manam kavalai, a composition by Papanasam Sivan, is also popular.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Harikambhojis notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields 5 other major melakarta ragams, namely, Kalyani, Sankarabharanam, Natabhairavi, Kharaharapriya and Hanumatodi.
For further details and an illustration refer related ragams section in Shankarabharanam page.
Trichy Sankaran is an Indian percussionist, composer, scholar, and educator.
pianist Suba Sankaran is acknowledged as one of the foremost virtuosos of the mridangam and also plays the kanjira on occasion.
Since the early 1970s, pianist Suba Sankaran has performed and recorded in a number of cross-cultural projects.
pianist Suba Sankaran has lived in Toronto since 1971.
pianist Suba Sankaran is the founder of the Tyagaraja Aradhana in Toronto and is a professor of music at York University.
Trichy Sankaran has been conferred the illustrious title, Sangeetha Kalanidhi, from the Madras Music Academy for the year 2011-2012.
Added to his reputation are, his tala-specific renditions, highlighting patterns contouring the tala orientation.
His lyrical displays of rhythmic aesthetics in mridangam playing have been the object lessons of the percussionists logistics.
Trichy Sankaran is also an avid world class clinician, and has performed workshops and clinics internationally.
With over half a century of concert experience in Carnatic music, Carnatic has accompanied over five generations of musicians.
As a performing artist of international repute, pianist Suba Sankaran has received numerous honors and awards.
The titles include :.
He has also held honorable positions at The Glenn Gould Foundation and Canada Council.
Work with ensembles.
pianist Suba Sankaran lives in Toronto, Canada in the district of North York.
pianist Suba Sankaran daughter is the vocalist and pianist Suba Sankaran.
pianist Suba Sankaran, along with His daughter father Trichy Sankaran and wind specialist Ernie Tollar, perform as Trichys Trio.
She also performs jazz numbers with the group Retrocity.
Released in India.
Charanam in Carnatic music is usually the end section of a composition which is sung after the anupallavi.
follows the pallavi.
The charana swaras are grouped in four different ways :.
Arabhi or Aarabhi is a ragam in Carnatic music.
It is a Janya raga, whose Melakarta raga is Shankarabharanam, 29th in the 72 Melakarta raga system.
Arabhi is a raga that dates back to 7 AD.
Originally, 7 AD was called as pazhanthakkam in Ancient Tamil music.
Then 7 AD was sung in a mixed variation of Devagandhari and Arabhi that is in use currently.
These two ragas are clearly distinguishable in current form.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . structure is as follows :.
Arabhi raga is an Owdava-sampoorna raga meaning, 5 swaras occur in the arohana and in avarohana all swaras occur.
It is a raga without much gamakas and frequency variations, relying instead on flat notes.
The closest raga to this one is Devangandhari.
There are few aspects which make Arabhi different.
Arabhi raga is a very energetic and it lends itself to creativity in brigas more than gamakas.
The 3rd of Pancharatna Kritis, Sadhinchanae by Saint Thyagaraja is a famous composition set in Arabhi raga.
Here are some more compositions set to Arabhi.
List of Janya Ragas.
Thus the list below is open to more additions/corrections.
Moreover, some musicians experiment and use new scales which had not been used before, leading to new janya ragas.
The melakartas are listed by numbers 1-72, with corresponding asampoorna melakarta names and scales listed just below.
Under those musical scales are the janyas associated with each melakarta.
If the raga has multiple scales in the same janya, these are given below the main scale.
List of Film Songs based on Ragas.
Joyce Paul Poursabahian.
Joyce Paul Poursabahian is an accomplished Indian classical dancer and exercise physiologist.
Classically trained in Bharat Natyam, she has also trained briefly in Mohiniattam, the classical dance of Kerala.
Joyce Paul Poursabahian . had her initial dance training under the acclaimed Bharatanatyam guru, Leela Samson.
She is the founder and the Artistic Director of Arpan set up in 2003 in Redmond, WA.
Education and Training.
She completed her Ph.D in Exercise Physiology from the Department of Anthropology, University of Delhi.
Career : Bharatnatyam industry.
her Ph.D has also assisted teaching at Kalashram Trust, New Delhi, founded and directed by Kathak exponent Pandit Birju Maharaj.
After moving to Redmond, WA to join Microsoft in 2001, Redmond founded Redmond own dance company Arpan.
Quoting about Redmond inspiration and Redmond works, Redmond says :.
If being passionate about dance does not make you a better human being, stop dancing and start praying.
Joyce Paul Poursabahian . has performed extensively over the last 17 years.
Performances of Carnatic music.
Carnatic music is usually performed by a small ensemble of musicians, who sit on an elevated stage.
This usually consists of at least ; a principal performer, a melodic accompaniment, a rhythm accompaniment, and a drone.
The drone itself is an integral part of performances and furnishes stability - the equivalent of harmony in Western music.
Performances can be musical or musical-dramatic.
Musical recitals are either vocal, or purely instrumental in nature, while musical-dramatic recitals refer to Harikatha.
In a vocal recital, a concert team may have one or more vocalists, accompanied by instrumentalists as melodic and rhythmic accompaniments.
The rhythm accompanist is usually a mridangam player.
The objective of the accompanying instruments is far more than following the melody and keeping the beats.
The accompaniments form an integral part of every composition.
presented, and they closely follow and augment the melodic phrases outlines by the lead singer.
The vocalist and the violinist take turns while elaborating or while exhibiting creativity in sections like raga, niraval and kalpanaswaram.
Some of the best concerts.
A contemporary Carnatic concert usually lasts about three hours, and usually comprises a number of varied compositions.
Carnatic songs are composed in a particular raga, which means that they do not deviate from the notes in the raga.
Each composition is set with specific notes and beats, but performers improvise extensively.
Concerts usually begin with a varnam or an invocatory item which will act as the opening piece.
The varnam is composed with an emphasis on swaras of the raga, but will also have lyrics, the saahityam.
It is lively and fast to get the audiences attention.
An invocatory item, may alternatively, follow the varnam.
After the varnam and/or invocatory item, the artist sings longer compositions called kirtanas.
After singing the opening kriti, usually, the performer sings the kalpanaswaram of the raga to the beat.
The violin performs these alternately with the main performer.
Performers then begin the main compositions with a section called raga alapana exploring the raga.
All of this is done without any rhythmic accompaniment, or beat.
Then the melodic accompaniment, expounds the raga.
Experienced listeners can identify many ragas after Experienced listeners hear just a few notes.
With the raga thus established, the song begins, usually with lyrics.
In this, the accompaniment performs along with the main performer and the percussion.
In the next stage of the song, they may sing niraval or kalpanaswaram again.
The percussion performers perform complex patterns of rhythm and display The percussion performers skill.
Following the main composition, the concert continues with shorter and lighter songs.
The audience of a typical concert has a reasonable understanding of Carnatic music.
It is also typical to see the audience tapping out the tala in sync with the artists performance.
As and when the artist exhibits creativity, the audience acknowledge it by clapping their hands.
With experienced artists, towards the middle of the concert, requests start flowing in.
The Music Season was started in 1927, to mark the opening of the Madras Music Academy.
Unlike the Madras Season which are held in closed auditoriums, the Ramanavami Music Festival is mostly held in Open Air Aoditoriums.
The pleasant Chaitra - month of Kannada Calendar and evening showers make up the event much more celebrous.
In Karnataka, Mysore, the concerts are held in Shri Bidaram Krishnappa Mandira and Jaganmohana Palace.
Sanjukta Panigrahi was a dancer of the India, who was the foremost exponent of Indian classical dance Odissi.
the Sanjukta is also recipient of the Sangeet Natak Akademi Award in 1976.
Sanjukta Panigrahi has also performed in France for eleven weeks, and participated there in the International Music Festival at Paris.
Early life and background.
Sanjukta Panigrahi was born in Berhampur, Ganjam District, Odisha state, to a traditional Brahmin family of Abhiram Mishra and Shakuntala Mishra.
Sanjukta Panigrahi mother was from Baripada and belonged to a family, which had been patronizing chhau folk dance for long.
Male dancers are called Gotipuas.
These girls were like Devadasis in the temples of South India.
At the initiative of Gotipuas mother, Her mother started to learn dance from Guru Kelucharan Mohapatra at age of 4.
Her mother was assessed to be the best child artist by the Bisuba Milan consecutively for three years during 1950-53.
Her mother mother had to shout at and cajole Her mother to stop dancing.
At the age of 9, Her mother performed at annual festival of the Childrens Little Theatre in Calcutta.
Her mother bagged the first prize in International Children 's Film Festival in 1952.
Encouraged by Her mother success, Her mother parents decided to send Her mother for better dance training, to Kalakshetra at Chennai.
There Her mother continued Her mother lessons under the guidance of Rukmini Devi Arundale.
After that, Her mother toured many places in the India and abroad, as a member of the Kalakshetra Ballet Troupe.
At the age of 14, Her mother returned to Odisha.
The state government awarded Her mother a scholarship to learn Kathak from Guru Hazarilal in Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, Mumbai.
However, Her mother left the course and returned to Odisha to concentrate on Indian classical dance Odissi.
The audience was enthralled by her guru Kelucharan Mahapatra performance.
Sanjuktas forte was Sanjukta Panigrahi Nritta, or pure dance, in which her Nritta was outstanding.
In Abhinaya, connoisseurs and critics were agreed on the fact that Abhinaya more often than not veered towards jatra and melodrama.
the Sanjukta continued to perform in most of the state functions.
For four decades, the Sanjukta remained an undisputed leading dancer of Indian classical dance Odissi.
the Sanjukta died of cancer at the age of 52, on 24th of June, 1997.
When the Sanjukta was 16 years of age, they got married and over a period of time had two sons.
Sanjukta Panigrahi is considered an embodiment of Guru Kelucharan Mahapatras art.
Sanjukta Panigrahi Awards.
Keeravani is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Keeravani is the 21st Melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
The 21st melakarta ragam as per Muthuswami Dikshitar school of music is.
This ragam is a popular scale in western music as well.
The Western equivalent is the Harmonic minor scale.
It is said to be borrowed into Hindustani music from Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 3rd ragam in the 4th chakra Veda.
The mnemonic name is Veda-Go.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ri gi ma pa dha nu.
Its structure is as follows :.
the notes used in this scale are chathusruthi rishabha, sadharana gandhara, suddha madhyama, panchama.
suddha dhaivatha, kakali nishadha.
As it is a melakarta ragam, by definition it is a sampoorna ragam.
It is the shuddha madhyamam equivalent of Simhendramadhyamam, which is the 57th melakarta.
Keeravani has many janya ragams associated with Keeravani.
Kalyana vasantam is a popular janya of Keeravani.
See List of janya ragams for full list of ragams associated with Keeravani.
Other popular janya ragams include Samapriya and Vasantamanohari.
Many composers have composed songs in Keeravani.
A few of Many composers are listed here.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Keeravanis notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields 3 other major melakarta ragams, namely, Hemavati, Vakulabharanam and Kosalam.
For further details and an illustration refer Graha bhedam on Keeravani.
In Tulu Nadu it is known as chande.
A Chenda is a cylindrical wooden drum, and has a length of two feet and a diameter of one foot.
Both ends are covered with the Chenda Vattam.
The Chenda is suspended from the drummers neck so that The animal skin hangs vertically.
Though both sides can be used for playing, only one is actually beaten.
Using two sticks, the drummer strikes the upper parchment.
This instrument is famous for its loud and rigid sound.
A Chenda has two sides, the left side called The Edamthala and the right side Valamthala.
The thickness is again reduced by 0.25 inches, at simultaneous points separated by 4 inches.
This is done in order to produce highly resonating sound.
Only the wooden rings with the skin is replaced once the quality of the sound is not up to the mark.
For regular Ompathe Kal Veechan Chenda artistes an average of 15 rings are required every year.
The Chenda is mainly played in Hindu temple festivals and as an accompaniment in the religious art forms of Kerala Navam.
It is also played in a dance-drama called Yakshagana which is popular in Tulu Nadu of Karnataka.
There is a variant of this instrument used in northern school of Yakshagana called Chande.
It is traditionally considered to be an Asura Vadyam  which means it can not go in harmony.
Ompathe Kal Veechan Chenda is an unavoidable musical instrument in all form of cultural activities in Kerala Navam.
Types of Ompathe Kal Veechan Chenda.
These Chendas are used for different purposes especially for different art forms.
Uruttu Chenda is used to play variations in music.
It is used to lead the orchestra.
It is called the Pramanavadhya.
The meaning of uruttu in Malayalam language is rolling.
The artist produce sound on Uruttu Chenda by rolling The artist right hand wrist.
This is done by rolling the wrist.
Veekku Chenda or Acchan Chenda is used to keep the thalam or the basic rhythm.
The meaning of Veekku in Malayalam language is beating hard.
The artist produce sound on Veekku Chenda by hitting the drum using a stick without twisting or rolling The artist wrist.
A Chenda Melam means percussion using Ompathe Kal Veechan Chenda.
The Chenda is used as a percussion instrument for almost all Kerala Navam art forms like Kathakali, Kodiyattam, Theyyam etc.
Chenda melam is the most popular form in Kerela, for more than 300 years.
A Chenda melam is an integral part of all festivals in Kerela.
There are 7 types of melangal viz Panchari melam, Champa, Chempada, Adantha, Anchadatha, Druvam and Pandy melam.
The earlier 6 melams are called Chempada melangal.
Other than these seven melams two more melams are there in Kerala Navam and Kalpam.
Shinkari Melam is not considered as a classical form of art.
The Valam Thala Chenda is played using a long and thin stick.
A Ganapathi Kai consists of 37 beats.
Here the letters starting with G and K are beaten using left hand and others by right hand.
Once the students learn how to do Ganapathi Kai, the master starts teaching Chenda Sadhakam or repeated exercise.
Usually a Sadhakam starts with a three beat Sadhakam called Tha Ki Ta Sadhakam.
Which is the thalam or the basic rhythm throughout the Percussion performance.
For a Tha Ki Ta Sadhakam the Onnam Kaalam is 3 beats in a geometric speed.
So the Randam Kaalam beats would be multiple of Onnam Kaalam, 6 beats.
Muunaam Kaalam would be multiple of Randam Kaalam, 12 beats, Naalam Kaalam would be 24 beats and so on.
While doing a Randam Kaalam, 6 beats should finish by the time taken for the 3 beats of Onnam Kaalam.
Similarly the Muunaam Kaalam should finish by the time taken for the 3 beats of Onnam Kaalam.
For a Naalam Kaalam, 24 beats should finish by the time taken for the Onnam Kaalam.
the Onnam Kaalam is the reason the Onnam Kaalam is called the thalam or the basic rhythm.
Vaai Thari, the drum like sound made by the student while beating on the Chenda.
Vaai Thari of Tha-Ki-Ta in 1st 2nd 3rd and 4th Kaalam.
Ki - Tha - Tha - -- > Here even if 6 sounds are produced only three beats are done.
Ki-Ta Tha-Ka Tha-Ri -- > Here 6 sounds are produced and 6 beats are done.
Ki-Ta-Tha-Ka Tha-Ri-Ki-Ta Tha-Ka-Tha-Ri -- > 12 sounds are produced and 12 beats are done.
Ki-Ta-Tha-Ka-Tha-Ri-Ki-Ta Tha-Ka-Tha-Ri-Ki-Ta-Tha-Ka Tha-Ri-Ki-Ta-Tha-Ka-Tha-Ri.
kii ... tt t.
k taa ... ri.
kii ... tt t.
k taa ... ri.
kitt.tk tri.kitt tk.tri.
kitttk.trikitt tktri.kitttk trikitt.tktri.
the Onnam Kaalam is a degree of geometric speed.
A Kalam starts with an Onnam Kaalam or the first degree of geometric speed.
A Kalam is the thalam or the basic rhythm throughout the percussion performance.
Depending up on the practice and experience a Chenda performer can perform in 7, 8, 9 or even 10 Kaalam.
So the Randam Kaalam beats would be multiple of Onnam Kaalam, 6 beats completed in 4 seconds.
Garimella Balakrishna Prasad.
Garimella Balakrishna Prasad is an Indian classical devotional singer and composer.
Garimella Balakrishna Prasad . served Tirumala Tirupati Devastanams Annamacharya Project as Special Grade Vocal Artiste from 1978 to 2006.
Garimella Balakrishna Prasad . is regarded as a pioneer in rendering devotional music in classical style, especially the Annamacharya sankirtanas.
Garimella Balakrishna Prasad . composed tunes for the lyrics of nearly a thousand songs composed by various poets.
Of these nearly six hundred of them were Annamacharya sankirtanas, and a RECORD is a RECORD.
Garimella Balakrishna Prasad . composed and sang in different styles such as Carnatic classical, light classical, folk and light music.
Balakrishna Prasad was born in Rajamundry, Andhra Pradesh to Krishnaveni and Narasimha Rao, a music teacher and a Vaggeyakara.
Garimella Balakrishna Prasad . holds a Diploma in Carnatic Music.
Garimella Balakrishna Prasad . is an A grade vocal artist of the All India Radio.
Prof. D.Pasupathi also taught Annamacharya songs as well as classical kritis during two year scholarship course offered by Tirumala Tirupati Devasthanams.
Dr. Mangalampalli Balamuralikrishna s music, mellifluous voice and unique rendering inspired Sri Balakrishna Prasad to learn classical music.
Sri Balakrishna Prasad also received musical training from Dr. Mangalampalli Balamuralikrishna.
From the inception till Annamacharyas retirement in 2006, Annamacharyas remained the principal exponent of Annamacharya Project.
Annamacharyas rendered remarkable services at various levels to raise it into a top cultural organization.
Annamacharyas Nadopasana spans over four decades.
Absolute faith, total commitment and the zeal for perfection are hallmarks of his music.
He consistently endeavours to improve his art and continues to grow as an artist.
He is married to G.Radha and has two sons - G.S.Pavana Kumar married to Srividya, G.V.N.Anila Kumar married to Swarna.
He is the nephew of playback singer S. Janaki.
His tunes for Annamayya sankeerthanas has been published by TTD.
Anayampatti S. Ganesan.
Anayampatti S. Ganesan is a Carnatic musician from South India.
In Madras 2005-2006 concert season, Anayampatti S. Ganesan . was the sole jal tarang performer.
Anayampatti S. Ganesan . jal tarang is a set of 19 antique porcelain bowls from China that are 100 years old.
Hamsanandi is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Hamsanandi is a hexatonic scale.
It is a derived scale, as it does not have all the seven swaras.
Hamsanandi is a janya ragam of Gamanashrama, the 53rd Melakarta ragam.
Hamsanandi has only the invariant panchamam missing from Hamsanandi parent scale, Gamanashrama, like Shree ranjani.
Structure and Lakshana.
Hamsanandi is a symmetric scale that does not contain panchamam.
Hamsanandi is called a shadava-shadava ragam, in Carnatic music classification.
Hamsanandi arohana-avarohana structure is as follows :.
This scale uses the notes shadjam, shuddha rishabham, antara gandharam, prati madhyamam, chathusruthi dhaivatham and kakali nishadam.
Hamsanandi is an evening ragam.
Hamsanandi has ample scope for alapana and swara prasthara.
This scale has been used by many composers for compositions in classical music.
Hamsanandi has been used to score film music too.
Here are some popular compositions in Hamsanandi.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Palani Subramaniam Pillai.
Palani Subramaniam Pillai was a well known Carnatic music percussionist.
Palani Subramaniam Pillai . was adept in playing the mridangam and kanjira.
Palani Subramaniam Pillai . was the sishya of the celebrated Palani Muthaiah Pillai.
Subramaniam Pillai was born on April 20, 1908.
Palani Subramaniam Pillai . was also influenced by a renowned mridangist at the time, Dakshinamurthy Pillai.
Later the team broke up much to the grief of a large number of listeners and especially Venkatesa Iyer.
It was one of the most popular among the doyens of yesteryears, Chembai Vaidyanatha Bhagavathar who took to promoting Palani.
There were numerous concerts in which he gave Palani opportunities to play three of four Thanis or solos in a concert.
Bhavagathars advice stood Palani in good stead.
While playing for younger artists Palani was never condescending but was always supportive and never tried to show off or intimidate.
Palani Sarvalaghu was the spontaneous flow of Nadais, Sollus, and Sollukkatus rather than any patternised formats.
The Sarvalaghu used to be Amorphous rather than Crystalline.
Occasionally when certain arithmetic combinations arose, Nadais too were spontaneous and blended seamlessly into the scheme of things.
The Sarvalaghu specialized in Vallinam and Mellinam strokes in even the smallest passages.
In laymans language these are Hard and Soft Strokes.
When Palani was present in a gathering there was no levity or frivolousness exhibited.
According to Vidwans who shared the platform with Palani in concerts both his demeanor and playing was the epitome of Gauravam.
His lifestyle in the 40s and 50s was the envy of other musicians.
Unlike many other musicians, he lived in a spacious Bungalow and owned the latest model in cars.
He himself drove the car and did not allow anyone else to drive his car.
Palanis partner in life was Palanis.
The pair had a daughter named Vimala.
a daughter named Vimala married Srinivasan and they had five daughters named Banu, Malathi, Meera, Geetha and Vasanthi.
Srinivasan and they were brought up by Rajammal after the death of Srinivasan.
Among Palani later disciples were Erode Gururajan, Madirimangalam Swaminathan, K.S.Kalidas, Cuddapah Krishnamoorthy, A.V.Ragguprasad, T.V.Gurumoorthy and many others.
In turn, Palani disciples have trained many others and the Palani School is now well represented in India and abroad.
In their steps, Palani was also a GREAT Kanjira vidwan besides being a master of Mridangam, Kanjira, Thavil.
Palani has played with vidwans like Palghat Mani Iyer and Ramanathapuram C.S.Murugabhoopathy.
Palani Khanjira performances were fewer and listeners thronged to these concerts whenever they occurred.
Some of Palanis disciples have emerged as vidwans proficient with both instruments.
Till he died in 1962, Palani performed Gurupooja each year at this Samadhi on Mamundia Pillais death anniversary.
This is the day preceding the Aradhana of Saint Thyagaraja.
After Palanis death Palanis disciples took this over and also initiated the Gurupooja for Palani across different places in Tamil Nadu.
In Kerala Palani 's disciples are Mavelikara Krishnan Kutty Nair and Mavelikara S. R. Raju.
Palani always cared Palani deciples like Palani own children and had a special care for Krishnankutty Nair.
Mavelikara Raju after retirement from All India Radio lives in Trivandrum and teaches many students.
Sikkil C. Gurucharan is among the foremost young performing musicians of Carnatic music in India today.
Sikkil C. Gurucharan is the grandson of Sikkil Kunjumani, elder of the internationally acclaimed flautists the Sikkil Sisters.
Sikkil C. Gurucharan has been under the tutelage Vaigal Shri S. Gnanaskandan and is currently being mentored by Shri B. Krishnamurthy.
Sikkil C. Gurucharan is an A grade All India Radio artist.
Around 1987, as a 5-year-old, Sikkil C. Gurucharan was casually coaxed by his grandmothers, the Sikkil Sisters, to sing some tune.
After a little cajoling, he sang a popular film song.
The sisters, especially Smt.
Neela, were amazed at the sruthi sudhham or tonal perfection in his singing and also the near-perfect alignment of the notes.
Together they decided that he must pursue vocal music.
Almost every second member in the family had been trained in flute.
But they were insistent that this boy should pursue singing, especially since he had shown immense promise at that age.
This was how Sikkil C. Gurucharan made Sikkil C. Gurucharan initial forays into Carnatic music.
Soon after the initiation, Sikkil C. Gurucharan family had to shift base to Hyderabad.
He began to involuntarily register the lessons that his sister learnt to play in the flute as well.
Guru Gnanaskandan was then the producer of All India Radio.
Education and initial career.
Sikkil Gurucharan was a student of Vidya Mandir Senior Secondary School, Mylapore, Chennai.
The professors at college were knowledgeable in Carnatic music and were very supportive of Carnatic development.
By this time, Sikkil C. Gurucharan had realized that Sikkil C. Gurucharan destiny was to pursue music.
Regular outstation concerts and other assignments forced Sikkil C. Gurucharan to further Sikkil C. Gurucharan education through correspondence.
Sikkil C. Gurucharan completed Sikkil C. Gurucharan masters degree in Financial Management from Loyola College, Chennai in 2004.
After completing post-graduation, Sikkil Gurucharan did a brief stint as a radio jockey at Worldspace Radio.
Music as a profession.
They have several albums to their credit.
The duo has performed with renowned artists like the Dhananjayans, Anita Ratnam, Anandavalli, Ramli Ibrahim and Muraad Ali among others.
Awards & recognition.
Albums & discography.
Sikkil Gurucharan is among young musicians who stand as youth ambassadors for the future of Carnatic Music.
This album has been the underlying theme in Gurucharans concerts in Singapore and Indonesia and received critical acclaim.
Here is a comprehensive list of The album Parama albums.
Sikkil Gurucharans mother Mythili, the daughter of Sikkil Kunjumani is a retired flute teacher from the Government Music College, Chennai.
Sikkil C. Gurucharan married Janani Lakshminarayan on May 23, 2010 and the couple resides in Chennai.
T. N. Sivakumar.
Thalainayar Narayanaswamy Sivakumar, is a visually challenged carnatic flutist guru from Chennai.
He is a disciple of Sri T. R. Mahalingam.
Sivakumar lost his father at an early age and was brought up by his mother.
His mother was very well versed in carnatic music who was his first teacher.
Sri.Sivakumar started learning vocal music from his mother and started learning the flute from the age of seventeen.
He started learning many songs just by listening to the radio.
He mastered many songs composed in a way his mother sang.
Sri Sivakumar was trained by flute maestro Sri T. R. Mahalingam, who was also his uncle.
He was trained at the Government Music College, Madras by Smt.
T. R. Navaneetham for a period of 3 years, where he went on to get his Diploma titled Vadya Visarada.
For a period of 10 years, he was also trained by Sri Prapancham Seetharam.
His first meeting with Sri.
Prapancham Sitaram was not a usual occurrence.
Prapancham Sitaram was playing one of his best in a program in The All India Radio.
The song which Prapancham Sitaram was playing had many intricate details, analyzing which, an expert would give an appreciation.
and moreover, that song was popularized by Sri.
Prapancham Sitaram and the style adopted by Sri.Sivakumar was the formers.
listening to the rendering, Sri.
Sri Prapancham Seetharam enquired about Sivakumars musical background and how did Sri Prapancham Seetharam learn the song.
Sivakumar not aware that it was Sri.Seetaram who was near him, questioning, he started telling his experiences.
He had no written notes.
He also said that he wanted to meet the genius musician at least once in his life.
It was Sri.Prapancham Sitaram who taught music to Sr.
Sivakumar for five years without expecting a single penny as a Dhakshinai.
Apart from Carnatic music, Sivakumar also learnt Hindustani music under Sri Krishna Nandhan.
Carnatic learnt to play film music from Sri P S Divakar for 2 years.
Carnatic became handicapped as both Carnatic eyes were hurt in an accident which led to retina damage.
Carnatic preliminary education in music was under Carnatic mothers guidance for the first 5 years.
Carnatic has trained around 2000 students over the past years.
Carnatic has traveled around the globe and given concerts in America, South Africa and Europe.
Awards and achievements.
Carnatic second performance was at Sadguru Sri Thyagaraja aradhana, Thiruvayaru on January 11, 1978 in the presence of Sri Kunnakudi Vaidyanathan.
Carnatic has also left Carnatic imprint in film music.
One can hear One flute in films like One Highness Abdullah and Nizhalgal.
Leela Samson is a Bharatanatyam dancer, choreographer, instructor and writer.
Early life and training.
Leela was born in Coonoor, Tamil Nadu.
After doing her B.A., her B.A. learnt Bharatanatyam at the Kalakshetra under the founder Rukmini Devi Arundale.
Starting her B.A. career as a Bharatanatyam soloist, Samson taught at Shriram Bharatiya Kala Kendra, Delhi and Gandharva Mahavidyalaya, Delhi.
Over the years her B.A. has performed across India and abroad including Europe, Africa and the Americas.
In 1995, Leela Samson formed Spanda, a dance group to review the traditional vocabulary of Bharatanatyam.
Two documentary films -- Sanchari and The Flowering Tree -- have been made on Sanchari works.
Amongst Sanchari notable disciples included Joyce Paul Poursabahian and Justin McCarthy, who now teaches at Sri Ram Bhartiya Kala Kendra.
Sanchari became the director of the Kalakshetra, Chennai in April 2005.
Sanchari resigned from this position in April 2012.
Before August 2010 Sanchari had was a member of the Academy for many years.
Sanchari authored a widely acclaimed biography of Rukmini Devi Arundale.
V.R. Raghava Krishna.
V.R. Raghava Krishna is a Carnatic music vocalist from Chennai, India.
Hailing from a family with a rich music tradition, he was exposed to the south.
Indian classical music at an early age.
V.R. Raghava Krishna is the son of veteran violin artist V.V. Ravi and Visalam Ravi.
V.R. Raghava Krishna . started learning music from V.R. Raghava Krishna . mother Visalam Ravi and Akhila seshadri.
V.R. Raghava Krishna . has been performing in various sabhas in and outside of Chennai.
Notably, Sri Krishna Gana Sabha, Naada Inbam, Sri Parthasarathy Swamy Sabha, Karthik Fine Arts, Bharat Kalachar,.
Kapali Fine Arts, Adambakkam Isai Mandram, Shanmukhananda Sabha Bombay,.
In Sindhu Bhairavi, Sindhu Bhairavi presented ` Samba Sadasiva ' - a lovely piece composed by Sindhu Bhairavi uncle V.V.S.
Sindhu Bhairavi concluded Sindhu Bhairavi brilliant recital with a brisk and lively Madhuvanti Tillana of Shanmugha Raghavan with swarakshara prayogas.
V.R. Raghava Krishna was a B-high graded artist in Classical music and devotional music in All India Radio, Chennai.
In November 2013 V.R. Raghava Krishna . was promoted as A Grade artist.
Apart from being a musician he is also a professional animator and a magician too.
He learnt 3D Animation & Visual Effects from Vancouver Film School, Canada.
He worked with the animation department of the video game.
Raghava Krishna has participated in the Childrens programs at All India Radio, Chennai.
V.R. Raghava Krishna . was awarded the First prize in the Junior Level.
V.R. Raghava Krishna . also walked away with the First prize in the popular programme Saptaswarangal conducted by Sun TV.
V.R. Raghava Krishna . was interviewed in the Malayalam network Surya TV in the programme titled Pookkooda.
M. L. Vasanthakumari.
Madras Lalitangi Vasanthakumari, was a Carnatic musician and playback singer for film songs in many Indian languages.
Her most famous disciples include Srividya, Sudha Raghunathan, A. Kanyakumari, Charumathi Ramachandran and Meena Subramanian.
MLV was born to a musical family.
Her father, Kuthanur Ayya Swamy Iyer, was a noted musician while her mother, Lalithangi, was also a great musician.
A rare gramophone record of her mother Lalithangi glorious voice rendering this song is said to be in V.Sundarams private possession.
He became Carnatic guru.
In Carnatic own words : My parents had rendered yeomen service to Carnatic music.
My parents were mainly instrumental in popularising the compositions of Purandara Dasa in South India.
My parents were not keen that My should enter the music field and gave My general education.
But in the musical atmosphere of My house, My had ample opportunity of practicing vocal music.
Once G N Balasubramaniam heard My sing and he prevailed upon My parents to place My under his tutelage.
It was he who was responsible for the status My occupy in the music world today.
Learning Carnatic music.
MLV was very privilleged to learn Carnatic music from G. N. Balasubramaniam.
Learning Carnatic music . was also GNBs first disciple.
Was his music according to Sampradaya or not, was the question that was frequently asked ?.
His personality, bold innovations and technical virtuosity became an inspiration for an entire generation of musicians.
Performing and recording career.
In 1940, her mother Lalithangi gave a resplendent musical recital in Simla.
MLV was then only 12 years old and made her mother Lalithangi debut by accompanying her mother Lalithangi mother.
Two years later, MLV gave a solo recital in Bangalore.
Her music had more male characteristics than that of any other female musician.
Her own musical style and genius.
GNBs leisurely, explorative and adventurous manner of handling ragas deserves special mention.
Similarly to GNB, GNBs was a genius in GNBs tricky, instantaneous brilliant manodharma.
MLVs mastery over vocal techniques was comprehensive and complete.
In GNBs own words,  Vasanthi typifies real discipleship -- Vasanthi absorbs all, but presents Vasanthi own glorious creations.
her mother Lalithangi, MLVs mother had a vast repertoire of Purandaradasa.
her mother Lalithangi passed on this tradition to her mother Lalithangi daughter MLV.
She popularised the composition Kalyana Gopalam, composed by Narayana Teertha, in raga Sindhubhairavi.
She also popularised the composition Venkatachala Nilayam by Purandaradasa in the same raga.
Hindustani maestro Bade Ghulam Ali Khan was generous in his praise for her music.
Ragam Thanam Pallavi.
But, to my great surprise, she would compose a Pallavi in the car on the way to the concert !.
By 1946, MLV was also a playback singer.
MLV was also known for singing Ayya Sami in the 1951 film, Or Iravu.
In the 1952 film Thayullam, MLV sang Konjum Purave which was based on the famous Hindi song, Thandi Havayen.
Incidentally, each of these songs contained the raga Kalyani and were also well-received.
As one of the top ranking platform artistes, MLV was noted for Bhookailas charm, grace, warmth, self-restraint and humility.
MLV however maintained a philosophy : A concert is a daily test of the calibre of a musician.
A slight lapse may let the musician down and a constant vigil is essential.
Mridangam maestro Palghat Mani Iyer, in a rare gesture, accompanied her in her Carnatic music concerts.
MLV got married to Late Kalaimamani Vikatam R.Krishnamurthy in the year 1951.
They had a son, K.Shankarraman and late K.Srividya.
MLV taught her daughter K.Srividya, who at the age of 10 was ready to perform and sang very much like MLV.
MLV trained several other students, and many of them are the front-ranking musicians today.
She also taught music to children at the Rishi Valley School started by Jiddu Krishnamurti.
Saraswathy Srinivasan is the first disciple of MLV till the late 1960s.
After marriage also Saraswathy Srinivasan jointly with MLV gave some her Carnatic music concerts.
Awards and titles.
MLV also received the third highest civilian honour from the Indian Government, Padma Bhushan.
In 1977, at age 49, MLV became the youngest woman to earn the award and title in Carnatic music, Sangita Kalanidhi.
She also received the Sangeetha Kalasikhamani award given by The Indian Fine Arts Society, Chennai in 1987.
MLV was a front ranking artiste for more than 50 years.
She died in 1990 at the age of 63.
Beauty and sublimity were the cardinal characteristics of her music.
All the kritis, as is the case with almost all of Tyagarajas compositions, are penned in Telugu.
Tyagaraja and the Pancharatna Kritis.
Tyagaraja lived in the late 18th century and early 19th century in Tiruvayyaru in present day Tanjore district in Tamil Nadu.
They are set to music in five ragas : Nata, Gaula, Arabhi, Varali and Sri.
The Pancharatna kritis are written in praise of the Hindu deity, Rama.
They are set to Adi Tala and each raga represents the mood of the song and the meaning of its lyrics.
The Pancharatna Kritis are :.
The melodic forms of these compositions are the five Ghana ragas of Carnatic music also called the ghanapanchaka.
These 5 ragas lend themselves to elaborate improvisations.
They are so called because they are suited to playing tanam on the veena.
Nata and Varali are the most ancient of the Carnatic ragas and date back to over a thousand years ago.
A particularly difficult musical challenge has been taken up successfully by Tyagaraja in three of these compositions.
The raga Naata has a particularly distinctive use of the dhaivatam note or swara.
Tyagaraja has avoided the dhaivatam completely in the first Pancharatna Kriti without losing the swarupa, or character, of the ragam.
Similarly gandharam is an accidental note of some beauty in Goula.
Tyagaraja avoids this too, except in one instance, without losing the character of the ragam.
In this song, Tyagaraja praises Rama, one of the incarnations of Lord Vishnu.
Rama eulogizes Ramachandra as one who is the cause of all bliss in the universe.
This is the only Pancharatna Kriti that was composed in Sanskrit.
Dudukugala nanne dora koduku brocura yento.
In a play on words, he reproaches those who desire wives and progeny.
Sadhincene o manasa.
This Pancharatna Kriti was composed in Telugu and has been set to Arabhi raga.
In this kriti, Tyagaraja sings the greatness of the lord Krishna in a lucid manner.
The style adopted in this kriti is very sweet in comparison with the other four.
Kana kana ruci ra kanaka vasana ninnu.
This consists of the story of Duryodhana and Dushasana 's analogies to the Ramayana.
Endaro mahanubhavulu is believed to be one of the early kritis of Tyagaraja composed in Telugu.
The song is a salutation to and praise of all the great saints and musicians down the ages.
In this poem, Tyagaraja describes the greatness of devotees of the Lord.
This, according to P. T. Narendra Menon, was the legendary, historically significant meeting between two great musicians.
Mangalam Muthuswamy was one of the notable vainikas in recent times.
Mangalam was born in a musical family at Sivaganga.
Mangalam received initial training in the Veena from Mangalam own mother, Smt.
Lakshmibai Ammal, a disciple of Sri Pallavi Ramaswamy Raju.
Association with the All India Radio and TV Networks.
Mangalam gave Mangalam maiden performance on the All India Radio at the age of 11.
This was the year 1948.
Then, over a period of 2 decades, Mangalam continued performing at the AIR and eventually earned an  A  grade.
Mangalam also went on to become a performing artiste at the Doordarshan Kendra, Mumbai.
Mangalam also went on to play for several TV documentaries, the most important being, the  Abode of God.
List of Carnatic composers.
List of composers of Carnatic music, a sub-genre of Indian classical music.
These composers lived during the time of the Trinity and there are recorded instances of Trinity-Age Composers interaction with the Trinity.
Other composers - Bhakti Saints.
In addition to the above composers, various Bhakti saints of medieval India also composed devotional hymns, verses and songs.
First six composer used ancient tamil music which later evolved to the Carnatic musical tradition over the centuries.
Sangeetha Kalanidhi or Sangita Kalanidhi is the title awarded yearly to an expert Carnatic Musician by the Madras Music Academy.
This honour is considered one of the highest awards in Carnatic music.
The youngest female awardee of the Sangita Kalanidhi award is M. L. Vasanthakumari at age of 49 years.
Palghat R. Raghu.
Palghat R. Raghu was a famous Carnatic musician and percussionist.
Palghat Ramaswamy Raghu was born on January 9, 1928 in Rangoon, Burma to Sri Palghat Ramaswamy Iyer and Ananthalakshmi Ammal.
As a child, he was immensely talented and inducted into mridangam lessons very early in his life.
His first mridangam lessons were from Tinniam Venkatarama Iyer and Trichy Raghava Iyer.
Later he learnt the art from the legendary Mridangam wizard Palghat T. S. Mani Iyer.
He was married to Palghat Mani Iyers niece, Smt Swarnambal.
Ever since, he had accompanied numerous artists for 60 years with distinction.
He was a graduate of mathematics.
Palghat R. Raghu . distinctive style is recorded in numerous concert tapes and CDs.
Palghat Raghu has toured extensively in Europe, USA, Australia, Malaysia and Singapore.
Palghat R. Raghu . had also been involved in East-West fusion music.
Kudamaloor Janardanan is an Indian flautist of the Carnatic music tradition.
Early life and background.
Kudamaloor Janardanan was born into a musical family in Kerala, India.
flautist Kudamaloor Janardanan had flautist Kudamaloor Janardanan basic vocal music lessons from flautist Kudamaloor Janardanan father, G. Krishna Iyer.
Soon flautist Kudamaloor Janardanan was fascinated by the art of instrumental music and turned to the Indian flute.
flautist Kudamaloor Janardanan is mostly a self-taught flautist.
flautist Kudamaloor Janardanan was awarded the scholarship for further studies in music by the Department of Culture, Government of Kerala, India.
flautist Kudamaloor Janardanan went on to obtain a graduate degree in Violin from Madras University.
Kudmaloor Janardhanan is an A Grade artiste of the All India Radio and an empanelled musician at the ICCR.
Among modern flautists of Kerala, India, flautist Kudamaloor Janardanan holds Ronu Majumdar in high esteem.
Kudmaloor Janardhanan, apart from having many published works, is also active in concerts circuits in Kerala, India and abroad.
Some of Kudmaloor Janardhanan Indian tours that got reviews in media are :.
Some of the concerts that flautist Kudamaloor Janardanan conducted aboard includes :.
flautist Kudamaloor Janardanan considers ragas as  the spirit of Indian classical music.
That was clear as flautist Kudamaloor Janardanan played such superb ragas as Nattakurinji, Mohanam, Chenchurutti, Sarasangi, and Sankarabharanam.
ragas are supreme in instrumental music with the kritis playing a secondary role.
This has resulted in the general impression that classical music means devotional music.
But many artistes still keep projecting the bhakti bhava.
He also uses  unconventional  instrumentation in his concerts.
In the Kovalam Lt Festival, he used Drums, Percussions, Keyboard and Voices in a Raga based concert.
He also uses Edakka and Tabla apart from conventional Mridagam and Ghatam.
What has been made so far are indeed sweet.
What we hear now may be sweeter ; however the sweetest is yet to come.
Wo n't we benefit much if we start thinking on these lines ?.
More on Kudamaloor 's approach to music can be heard from these interviews available in YouTube.
Most of the works cited here is produced by Manorama Music and can be bought at Manorama Music site.
Janardhanan 's work is available from iTunes and Amazon MP3 download section.
Madhava Murali has 6 songs in 50 minutes rendered mainly in bamboo flute in Carnatic Music style.
Sub title of the music is  Compositions on Lord Krishna in Flute.
The main kriti is this disc is  Krupaya Palaya  Charukesi which lasts for 12 minutes.
Other Kritis are Alai Payuthe, Rara venugopala, Krishna Ni Bhegane and Enna Thavam Kapi.
Main flute is played by Kudamaloor Janardhanan.
The accompanying artists on Mridangam, Veena, Ghatam and second flutes are not known.
Poomoodam Devi contains 11 devotional songs.
This is a vocal work by K S Chitra, Radhika Thilak, Sujatha Mohan and Madhu Balakrishnan.
Kudamloor Janardhanan plays Rara Venu Kriti in this work.
Mohana Murali has 4 songs in 58 minutes rendered mainly in bamboo flute in Carnatic Style.
Subtitle of this album is  An Album based on sublime raga Mohanam.
Main song is Mohana Layatharangam that lasts for 24 minutes.
According to a review,  Mohana Laya Tarangam speaks to your soul with the Soul remarkable blend of rhythm and melody.
One perceives not only Mohanam, but four other ragas, owing to the unique technique applied here, called ` sruti bhedam.
Swathi Murali has 6 songs in 63 minutes rendered mainly in bamboo flute in Carnatic Style.
The album is a flute rendition of some of the compositions of Swathi Thirunal.
Other kritis included are Gopalaka Pahiman Anisham, Parama Purusha, Tharuni Njana Enthu Cheyvu and Madhava Murali.
The main kriti played in flute with an ensemble of Tabla, Mridangam, Veena, Chenda and Voice.
Main song is Sree Vathapi Ganapthe which lasts for 28 minutes.
Other kritis are Sidhi Vinayakam and Mahaganapathim.
Pranam has 5 songs in 59 minutes rendered mainly in bamboo flute played both in Carnatic Style and Hindustani Style.
Subtitle of the this album is  A South Indian Flautist pays homage to Hindustani Music Legend Ustad Bismillah Khan.
Pranam is the longest song in this album that lasts for 25 minutes.
Other pieces are Kajri, Sree Ramachandra and Kajri.
Hari Krishnamoorthy plays Tabala.
Gokula Murali has 6 songs in 47 minutes mainly rendered in bamboo flute played in Carnatic Style.
This album is a collection of songs devoted to Swagatham Krishna.
The kritis in this album are Sreeman Narayana, Swagatham Krishna, Govardhana Giridhara, Radhasametha Krishna, Manasa Sancharare and Theeratha Vilaiyattu Pillai.
Mridangam is played by Vypin Sathish, Tabla by Hari Krishnamoorthy, Edakka by Trichur Swagatham Krishna and Ghatam by Kottayam Unnikrishnan.
Atmayan : Journey of the Soul has 6 songs 39 minutes.
This album is a collection of instrumental music created both in Indian and Western Styles.
Kudamallor plays Atmayan and Ode to Swagatham Krishna.
This album also has work by U Rajesh in Mandolin, Herald, Krishna Kumar and Sumesh Parameshwar.
Kudamaloor Janardhanan Live has 8 songs in 169 minutes rendered in bamboo flute in Carnatic Style.
flautist Kudamaloor Janardanan is accompanied by Hari Krishnamoorthy on Tabala, Kottayam Krishnan on Ghatam and Satish Vypin on Mridangam.
The Main Kriti is Chaliye Kunchanamoo that lasts for 30 minutes.
Other Kritis in this album are Baja Manasa, Sree Ramanavibho, Raminsuva, Raghuvamsasudha and Krishna Nee Begane.
The concert end with Swara Manjari played in Western Style.
Vrindavanam is a set of devotional Swagatham Krishna songs by Swetha Menon with 7 songs in 60 minutes.
Concept and Music is provided by Kudmaloor Janardhanan.
Keerthana Murali has 6 songs in 60 minutes played in bamboo flute in Carnatic Style.
The subtitle of the album is  Popular Carnatic Krithis.
Vypin Satheesh accompanies the flute with Mridangam.
The main song is Pakkala that lasts for 15 minutes.
Other Kritis in this album are Raga Sudharasa, Thatwamaruka, Nee Dayaradha, Seetha Kalyana and Bhagyada Lakshmi.
Maya Murali has 9 Songs in 66 minutes mainly rendered in bamboo flute in Carnatic Style.
In terms of its length, Long Live Music is the main song in this album.
The accompanying musicians are H Kishore, Harikrishna Moorthy and Vinod Chandra Menon.
Viraha-The Symphony of Separation is an audio CD containing songs played in bamboo flute and is about the pangs of separation.
Gokulam is a set of devotional songs on Lord Guruvayoorappa by Hema Ravishankar and G Venugopal.
Kudamaloor Janardhanan provided the background score for this album.
Ramanan is a musical based on Changampuzha 's ` Ramanan '.
The main character Ramanan 's flute is played by Kudamaloor Janardhanan.
These artists worked with Kudmaloor Janardhanan in many of Kudmaloor Janardhanan albums and concerts.
Vypin Satheesh : Mridangam.
S Kishore : Mridangam.
Balkrishna Kammathu : Mridangam.
P. V. Anilkumar : Mridangam.
Harikrishna Moorthy : Tabala.
Jon B. Higgins.
His son Nicholas Higgins lived much of His son Nicholas Higgins student and professional life at Wesleyan University.
Early life and education.
His son Nicholas Higgins also maintained a deep relationship with His son Nicholas Higgins family.
His son Nicholas Higgins was a singer of European and Western classical music.
His son Nicholas Higgins returned to India as a Senior Research Fellow of the American Institute of Indian Studies.
His son Nicholas Higgins was planning to perform in South Africa in protest against December 7, 1984 then racist apartheid regime.
His son Nicholas Higgins was much appreciated by Indian connoisseurs.
Other of His son Nicholas Higgins most famous renditions include Siva Siva Anarada, Krishna Nee Begane, and Kaa Vaa Vaa.
This did not deter the master, who went on to deliver katcheri broadcasts on All India Radio.
His son Nicholas Higgins is an ethnomusicologist and a student of Carnatic Music.
Latangi is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Latangi is the 63rd Melakarta ragam in the 72 melakarta ragam system of Carnatic music.
Latangi is called Geetapriya or Gitapriya in Muthuswami Dikshitar school of Carnatic music.
Structure and Lakshana.
Structure and Lakshana . is the 3rd ragam in the 11th chakra Rudra.
The mnemonic name is Rudra-Go.
The mnemonic phrase is sa ri gu mi pa dha nu.
The mnemonic phrase structure is as follows :.
As Latangi is a melakarta ragam, by definition Latangi is a sampoorna ragam.
Latangi is the prati madhyamam equivalent of Sarasangi, which is the 27th melakarta.
Latangi has a few minor janya ragams associated with Latangi.
See List of janya ragams for full list of ragams associated with Latangi.
Here are a few common compositions sung in concerts, set to Latangi.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Latangis notes when shifted using Graha bhedam, yields 2 other melakarta ragams, namely, Sooryakantam and Senavati.
For further details and an illustration refer Graha bhedam on Sooryakantam.
Vijayalakshmy Subramaniam is an eminent Carnatic music vocalist.
Carnatic has conducted numerous workshops and lecture demonstrations on the various aspects of Carnatic Music.
Carnatic has presented papers at international conferences in many countries over the last decade.
Carnatic is a serious researcher of music.
A doctorate in music, Vijayalakshmy Subramaniam was awarded the prestigious Fulbright Visiting Lecturer Fellowship in 2010.
Tamil learnt detailed aspects of manodharma sangita or improvisation under the guidance of guru Sangeeta Bhushanam K Krishnaswamy of Annamalai University.
Tamil gurus also include Vidwans S.Rajam, T. R. Subramaniam and V. R. Krishnan.
The Fulbright Lecturer Fellowship in 2010.
Vijayalakshmy Subramaniam is a dedicated teacher and has groomed many students in vocal music.
She is also a resource person on the popular e-learning website www.carnaticstudent.org.
Reaching Out To Society Through Music.
Subbaraya Sastri the son and student of Syama Sastri, one of the most famous figures in the history of Carnatic music.
Subbaraya Sastri was born in 1803 as the second son of Syama Sastri.
Subbaraya Sastri studied music initially from Subbaraya Sastri father.
Later Syama Shastri asked Tyagaraja to teach Tyagaraja son and sent Subbaraya Sastri to Syama Shastri.
Syama Shastri also had the opportunity to learn a few krithi from Muthuswami Dikshitar.
Subbaraya Shastry composed only a few krithi.
But their technical quality, beauty, devotion and intricacies have made them enduring and famous.
Subbaraya Sastri composed most of Subbaraya Sastri kritis in praise of the Mother Goddess.
Some of Subbaraya Sastri famous kritis are Janani ninnuvina, Ninnusevinchina, Venkatasailavihara and Sankari Nee.
Umayalpuram K. Narayanaswamy.
Umayalpuram K. Narayanaswamy, was a Carnatic classical percussionist.
He established his mark playing the ghatam with such dexterity and beauty in phrasing.
Patrick Ngcobo is a notable Carnatic classic musician born in Kloof, Durban, South Africa.
Patrick Ngcobo belongs to the warrior Zulu tribe in KwaZulu-Natal province in South Africa.
Although Patrick Ngcobo is a Zulu singer Patrick Ngcobo can sing songs in Tamil, Kannada, Telugu, and Malayalam languages.
Patrick Ngcobo teacher is the famous Indian singer Dr. K. J. Yesudas.
He hosts a regular show on Carnatic music on the South African radio station Lotus FM.
Mohanakalyani is a ragam in Carnatic music.
Mohanakalyani is a janya ragam from the 65th melakarta scale Mechakalyani.
Mohanakalyani is a janya scale, as Mohanakalyani does not have all the seven swaras in the ascending scale.
Mohanakalyani is a combination of the pentatonic scale Mohanam and the sampurna raga scale Kalyani.
The equivalent of Mohanakalyani in Hindustani music is Bhoop Kalyan or Shuddha Kalyan.
Bhoop Kalyan belongs to the Bhoop Kalyan thaat of Hindustani music.
Similar to Mohanakalyani, Bhoop Kalyan is a combination of Bhoop and Bhoop Kalyan.
Structure and Lakshana.
Mohanakalyani is an asymmetric ragam that does not contain madhyamam or nishadham in the ascending scale.
Mohanakalyani is an audava-sampurna ragam.
Mohanakalyani structure is as follows :.
For the details of the notations and terms, see swaras in Carnatic music.
A few compositions have been set to Mohanakalyani ragam.
Here are some popular kritis composed in Mohanakalyani.
This section covers the theoretical and scientific aspect of this ragam.
Trichur V. Ramachandran.
Trichur V. Ramachandran is a Carnatic music vocalist.
Trichur V. Ramachandran . was born in 1940 in Thrissur, Kerala.
Later Trichur V. Ramachandran . underwent training under M L Vasanthakumari as part of an Indian government Cultural Scholarship.
Trichur V. Ramachandran . married Charumathi in 1973.
Trichur V. Ramachandran . is recipient of Sangeet Natak Akademi Award in 2003.
Trichur V. Ramachandran . also received the Padma Bhushan award from the Government of India in 2003.
Shri Trichur Ramachandran is the Sangeetha Kalanidhi awardee for 2012.
This is the prestigious award from the Madras Music Academy.
An electronic tanpura is an electronic instrument that replicates the sound of an Indian string instrument known as the tanpura.
In Indian music, drone is a basic function of the music.
Traditionally drone is provided by one or more tanpura player, especially for vocal performances.
The range is usually one to two octaves.
For many musicians the electronic tanpura is a practical commodity.
It delivers a passable substitute for a real, live tanpura.
Certainly, it is much easier and less expensive than maintaining a live tanpura player.
The products were manufactured by the company Raj Narayan founded, Radel.
The first versions were created with the technology then available, using discrete components and transistors.
In the late 1990s, these gave way to models using sampled recordings of the traditional tanpura on a chip.
These copies have earned a bad name as the little white boxes and comparisons are made to the traditional acoustic tanpuras.
The samavadi is the second-most prominent note of a raga in Indian classical music.
A samvadi is a note of special significance.
A performer will typically try to emphasize the samvadi along with the vadi when improvising on a certain raga.
Sri Gopala Dasa was a prominent 18th-century saint, under the Haridasa tradition.
Gopala Dasa was born as Bhaganna to Murariraya and Venkamma in Mosarakallu in Raichur district of Karnataka.
From a very young age, Bhaganna was initiated into spirituality and Dvaita philosophy.
Murariraya and Venkamma were a poor Brahmin couple living in village Mosarakallu in Raichur district of Karnataka.
Murariraya and Venkamma were blessed with four sons -- Bhaganna, Dasappa, Seenappa and Rangappa.
When Rangappa was an infant, Murariraya died, leaving his family helpless and destitute.
They were driven out of the village by their kinsmen.
Venkamma moved with Venkamma children to Sankapura, another village.
There also they could not find any shelter as the villagers offered them no help.
In the outskirts of Sankapura there was a dilapidated temple of Anjaneyaswamy.
As the saying goes - God is the refuge of the helpless - Anjaneyaswamy gave them shelter !.
The mother and sons started to live there.
Venkamma used to go to the village for alms.
Cakes became delicious dishes for the children.
During the harvesting season, Venkamma was able to collect food-grains.
One compassionate farmer donated them a piece of land and another farmer helped them cultivate One, yielding a bumper crop.
But the village the Karnam, accusing Venkamma of illegally utilisizing water from the Government Tank, confiscated the food grains.
Actually, the village Karnam was taking revenge against her for not working as a servant in the village Karnam house.
Venkamma begged the village Karnam to show mercy but the village Karnam drove Venkamma away mercilessly.
Miraculously, Bhagannas curses came true.
The village Karnam dies childless and the tank remains dry even today !.
Venkanna approached the village teacher and requested Venkanna to accept her sons as Venkanna students.
The compassionate teacher agreed and started teaching them with affection.
The three boys began learning enthusiastically.
After sometime, one householder in the village performed Bhagannaa thread - ceremony along with that of his son.
Bhaganna was initiated into the Gayathri-Mantra and decided to meditate on the Gayathri-Mantra, with his mothers encouragement.
One day, when Bhaganna was meditating, a huge serpent entwined his body and put One day hood above his head !.
Seeing this, people ran to Venkamma and brought Venkamma there.
However, knowing the power of the Gayathri Mantra, Venkamma did not panic.
Before their very eyes, the serpent uncoiled itself from Bhagannas body and disappeared !.
One day Bhaganna felt as if some unknown hand was writing the BhIjakshrAs on his tongue.
From then, a new chapter began in his life.
Bhaganna once visited Advani, a town in Andhra where the famous saint Sri Vijaya Dasaru lived.
Bhaganna who had heard many legends about him decided become his disciple.
He wanted to be initiated into the Dasa order and enlightened by the famous saint.
Sri Vijaya Dasa was happy to initiate him and give him the Ankitha of Gopala Vitthala.
From that day onwards Bhaganna became Gopala Dasa.
He travelled all over the country from Rameshwaram to Badari.
He used to visit Tirumala every year for the Brahmostvam of Lord Sri Venkateshwara.
There was a renowned scholar named Srinivasacharya in Manvi, in Raichur district.
He did not like Haridasas and thought very poorly of Kannada dEvaranAmAs.
He resented the popularity of Vijaya Dasa and Gopala Dasa.
Once when Sri Vijaya dAsa and Sri Gopala Dasa visited Manvi, a great feast was organized in their honor.
Even though Srinivasa was absent at the feast, Sri Vijayadaasaru sent Srinivasa a personal invitation to attend the feast.
In order to avoid the feast Srinivasa sent a message saying that because of stomach problems Srinivasa had already taken lunch.
Sri Vijaya dAsa said So be it !.
From that day, Srinivasa developed intense stomach problems which grew worse by the day, finally reaching unbearable proportions.
Srinivasa went to Tirupathi, Ghatikaachala and Mantralaya, performing intense Seva towards the Lord, Vaayu Devaru and Sri Raghavendra Swamigalu.
None of this proved to be of any avail.
Finally, at the end of Srinivasa stay in Mantralaya Srinivasa decided to commit suicide.
Srinivasa felt intense disgust at Srinivasa own arrogance and rushed to Sri Vijaya dAsa, deeply regretting Srinivasa behavior.
Srinivasa went to Sri gOpAla dAsa and spent some time with Srinivasa.
Srinivasa realized the greatness of both the dAsas and the fallacy of Srinivasa own thinking.
Later, Sri gOpAla dAsa and Srinivasa visited Tirupathi, where another miracle happened.
Due to a combination of his previous ill-health and the strain of travelling to Tirupathi, Srinivasa expired on Bhadrapada Shukla Navami.
gOpAla dAsa immediately complied, and by the grace of the Lord, Srinivasa came back to life again.
Later, Gopala dAsa gave Haridaasa Deekshe to Srinivasa and directed him to Pandarapur for ankitha.
Later Srinivasa became renowned as jagannAta dAsa.
This is the evidence of the sacrifice of Gopala Dasa.
Once while he was in the forest looking for tuLasi, a horse-rider started chasing him.
Finally, when he was unable to run any further, Dasaru gave up and surrendered to the rider, expecting the worst.
The rider came near him and said Ale Nahi and vanished.
He promptly visited Pandharapur and Udupi.
How great must he have been, who was personally invited by the Lord !.
After that Pushya of the year Chitrabhanu sat in meditation and laid down Pushya of the year Chitrabhanu mortal body.
Pushya of the year Chitrabhanu famous disciples were Vyasa Tatvagnya, Ajit swami.
Dasappa, Gopala dasas brother was called Guru Gopal Dasa.
Dasappa, Gopala was a great seer.
Seenappa Dasa too, was a seer and Seenappa Dasa too fame spread far and wide.
gOpa prakara sankAsham gOpAlarchana tatparam.
gOdEva vandya pAdArjam gOpAlaKhya gurum Bhaje.
Gopala Dasa has composed numerous songs in Kannada in praise of the Hindu god Purandhara Vittala.
